In Troy, there lies thescene. From isles of Greece
The princes orgulous,their high blood chafed,
Have to the port of Athenssent their ships,
Fraught with the ministersand instruments
Of cruel war: sixty andnine, that wore
Their crownets regal, fromthe Athenian bay
Put forth toward Phrygia;and their vow is made
To ransack Troy, withinwhose strong immures
The ravish'd Helen,Menelaus' queen,
With wanton Paris sleeps;and that's the quarrel.
To Tenedos they come;
And the deep-drawing barksdo there disgorge
Their warlike fraughtage:now on Dardan plains
The fresh and yetunbruised Greeks do pitch
Their brave pavilions:Priam's six-gated city,
Dardan, and Tymbria,Helias, Chetas, Troien,
And Antenorides, withmassy staples
And corresponsive andfulfilling bolts,
Sperr up the sons of Troy.
Now expectation, ticklingskittish spirits,
On one and other side,Trojan and Greek,
Sets all on hazard: andhither am I come
A prologue arm'd, but notin confidence
Of author's pen or actor'svoice, but suited
In like conditions as ourargument,
To tell you, fairbeholders, that our play
Leaps o'er the vaunt andfirstlings of those broils,
Beginning in the middle,starting thence away
To what may be digested ina play.
Like or find fault; do asyour pleasures are:
Now good or bad, 'tis butthe chance of war.
Call here my varlet; I'llunarm again:
Why should I war withoutthe walls of Troy,
That find such cruelbattle here within?
Each Trojan that is masterof his heart,
Let him to field; Troilus,alas! hath none.
Will this gear ne'er bemended?
The Greeks are strong andskilful to their strength,
Fierce to their skill and totheir fierceness valiant;
But I am weaker than awoman's tear,
Tamer than sleep, fonderthan ignorance,
Less valiant than thevirgin in the night
And skilless asunpractised infancy.
Well, I have toldyou enough of this:
for my part, I'll not meddlenor make no further.
He that will have acake out of the wheat
must needs tarrythe grinding.
Have I not tarried?
Ay, the grinding; but youmust tarry the bolting.
Ay, the bolting, but youmust tarry the leavening.
Still have I tarried.
Ay, to the leavening; buthere's yet in the word
'hereafter' the kneading,the making of the cake,
the heating of theoven and the baking;
nay, you must staythe cooling too,
or you may chanceto burn your lips.
Patience herself, whatgoddess e'er she be,
Doth lesser blench atsufferance than I do.
At Priam's royal table doI sit;
And when fair Cressidcomes into my thoughts,--
So, traitor! 'When shecomes!' When is she thence?
Well, she looked yesternightfairer than ever I saw
her look, or any womanelse.
I was about to tellthee:--when my heart,
As wedged with a sigh,would rive in twain,
Lest Hector or my fathershould perceive me,
I have, as when the sundoth light a storm,
Buried this sigh inwrinkle of a smile:
But sorrow, that is couch'din seeming gladness,
Is like that mirth fateturns to sudden sadness.
An her hair were not somewhatdarker than Helen's--
well, go to--there were no morecomparison between the women:
but, for my part, sheis my kinswoman;
I would not, as theyterm it, praise her:
but I would somebody had heardher talk yesterday, as I did.
I will not dispraise yoursister Cassandra's wit, but--
O Pandarus! I tell thee,Pandarus,--
When I do tell thee, theremy hopes lie drown'd,
Reply not in how manyfathoms deep
They lie indrench'd. Itell thee I am mad
In Cressid's love: thouanswer'st 'she is fair;'
Pour'st in the open ulcerof my heart
Her eyes, her hair, hercheek, her gait, her voice,
Handlest in thy discourse,O, that her hand,
In whose comparison allwhites are ink,
Writing their own reproach,to whose soft seizure
The cygnet's down is harshand spirit of sense
Hard as the palm of ploughman:this thou tell'st me,
As true thou tell'st me,when I say I love her;
But, saying thus, insteadof oil and balm,
Thou lay'st in every gashthat love hath given me
The knife that made it.
I speak no more thantruth.
Thou dost not speak somuch.
Faith, I'll not meddlein't. Let her be as she is:
if she be fair, 'tis the betterfor her; an she be not,
she has the mendsin her own hands.
Good Pandarus, how now,Pandarus!
I have had my labourfor my travail;
ill-thought on of her andill-thought on of you;
gone between and between, butsmall thanks for my labour.
What, art thou angry,Pandarus? what, with me?
Because she's kin to me,
therefore she's notso fair as Helen:
an she were not kin to me, shewould be as fair on Friday
as Helen is on Sunday.But what care I?
I care not an shewere a black-a-moor;
'tis all one to me.
Say I she is not fair?
I do not care whetheryou do or no.
She's a fool to stay behind herfather; let her to the Greeks;
and so I'll tell her the nexttime I see her: for my part,
I'll meddle nor make nomore i' the matter.
Pandarus,--
Not I.
Sweet Pandarus,--
Pray you, speak no more to me: Iwill leave all as I found it,
and there an end.
Peace, you ungraciousclamours! peace, rude sounds!
Fools on both sides! Helenmust needs be fair,
When with your blood youdaily paint her thus.
I cannot fight upon thisargument;
It is too starved asubject for my sword.
But Pandarus,--O gods, howdo you plague me!
I cannot come to Cressidbut by Pandar;
And he's as tetchy to bewoo'd to woo.
As she is stubborn-chasteagainst all suit.
Tell me, Apollo, for thyDaphne's love,
What Cressid is, whatPandar, and what we?
Her bed is India; thereshe lies, a pearl:
Between our Ilium andwhere she resides,
Let it be call'd the wildand wandering flood,
Ourself the merchant, andthis sailing Pandar
Our doubtful hope, ourconvoy and our bark.
How now, Prince Troilus!wherefore not afield?
Because not there: thiswoman's answer sorts,
For womanish it is to befrom thence.
What news, AEneas, fromthe field to-day?
That Paris is returnedhome and hurt.
By whom, AEneas?
Troilus, by Menelaus.
Let Paris bleed; 'tis buta scar to scorn;
Paris is gored withMenelaus' horn.
Hark, what good sport isout of town to-day!
Better at home, if 'wouldI might' were 'may.'
But to the sport abroad:are you bound thither?
In all swift haste.
Come, go we then together.
Who were those went by?
Queen Hecuba and Helen.
And whither go they?
Up to the eastern tower,
Whose height commands assubject all the vale,
To see the battle.
Hector, whose patienceIs, as a virtue, fix'd,
to-day was moved:
He chid Andromache andstruck his armourer,
And, like as there werehusbandry in war,
Before the sun rose he washarness'd light,
And to the field goes he;where every flower
Did, as a prophet, weep whatit foresaw In Hector's wrath.
What was his cause ofanger?
The noise goes, this:there is among the Greeks
A lord of Trojan blood,nephew to Hector;
They call him Ajax.
Good; and what of him?
They say he is a very manper se,
And stands alone.
So do all men, unless they aredrunk, sick, or have no legs.
This man, lady, hathrobbed many beasts
of their particular additions;he is as valiant as the lion,
churlish as the bear,slow as the elephant:
a man into whom naturehath so crowded humours
that his valour iscrushed into folly,
his folly saucedwith discretion:
there is no man hath a virtuethat he hath not a glimpse of,
nor any man an attaint but hecarries some stain of it:
he is melancholy without cause,
and merry against the hair: hehath the joints of every thing,
but everything so out of jointthat he is a gouty Briareus,
many hands and no use,
or purblind Argus, alleyes and no sight.
But how should this man,that makes me smile,
make Hector angry?
They say he yesterday copedHector in the battle
and struck him down, thedisdain and shame whereof hath
ever since kept Hectorfasting and waking.
Who comes here?
Madam, your unclePandarus.
Hector's a gallant man.
As may be in the world,lady.
What's that? what's that?
Good morrow, unclePandarus.
Good morrow, cousin Cressid:what do you talk of?
Good morrow, Alexander.How do you, cousin?
When were you at Ilium?
This morning, uncle.
What were you talkingof when I came?
Was Hector armed and goneere ye came to Ilium?
Helen was not up, was she?
Hector was gone, but Helenwas not up.
Even so: Hector wasstirring early.
That were we talking of,and of his anger.
Was he angry?
So he says here.
True, he was so: Iknow the cause too:
he'll lay about him to-day,I can tell them that:
and there's Troilus willnot come far behind him:
let them take heed of Troilus,I can tell them that too.
What, is he angry too?
Who, Troilus? Troilus isthe better man of the two.
O Jupiter! there's nocomparison.
What, not betweenTroilus and Hector?
Do you know a manif you see him?
Ay, if I ever saw himbefore and knew him.
Well, I say Troilus isTroilus.
Then you say as I say; for,I am sure, he is not Hector.
No, nor Hector is notTroilus in some degrees.
'Tis just to each of them;he is himself.
Himself! Alas, poorTroilus! I would he were.
So he is.
Condition, I had gonebarefoot to India.
He is not Hector.
Himself! no, he's not himself:would a' were himself!
Well, the gods are above;time must friend or end:
well, Troilus, well: I wouldmy heart were in her body.
No, Hector is not abetter man than Troilus.
Excuse me.
He is elder.
Pardon me, pardon me.
Th' other's not come to't; youshall tell me another tale,
when th' other's come to't.
Hector shall not havehis wit this year.
He shall not need it, ifhe have his own.
Nor his qualities.
No matter.
Nor his beauty.
'Twould not become him;his own's better.
You have no judgment, niece:
Helen herself sworeth' other day,
that fora brown favour
--for so 'tis, I must confess,--not brown neither,--
No, but brown.
'Faith, to say truth,brown and not brown.
To say the truth, true andnot true.
She praised his complexionabove Paris.
Why, Paris hath colourenough.
So he has.
Then Troilus should have toomuch: if she praised him above,
his complexion ishigher than his;
he having colour enough,and the other higher,
is too flaming a praisefor a good complexion.
I had as lief Helen'sgolden tongue
had commended Troilusfor a copper nose.
I swear to you. I think Helenloves him better than Paris.
Then she's a merry Greekindeed.
Nay, I am sure she does. Shecame to him th' other day
and puts me her whitehand to his cloven chin--
Juno have mercy! how cameit cloven?
Why, you know 'tis dimpled:I think his smiling
becomes him better thanany man in all Phrygia.
O, he smiles valiantly.
Does he not?
O yes, an 'twere a cloudin autumn.
Why, go to, then:
I cannot choose but laugh, tothink how she tickled his chin:
she has a marvellouswhite hand,
I must needs confess,--
Without the rack.
And she takes upon her to spya white hair on his chin.
Alas, poor chin! many awart is richer.
But there was such laughing!Queen Hecuba laughed
that her eyes ran o'er.
With mill-stones.
And Cassandra laughed.
Did her eyes runo'er too?
And Hector laughed.
At what was all thislaughing?
Marry, at the white hair thatHelen spied on Troilus' chin.
An't had been a green hair,I should have laughed too.
They laughed not so much at thehair as at his pretty answer.
What was his answer?
Quoth she, 'Here's but two andfifty hairs on your chin,
and one of them is white.
This is her question.
'Two and fifty hairs'quoth he, 'and one white:
that white hair is my father,and all the rest are his sons.'
'Jupiter!' quoth she, 'whichof these hairs is Paris,
my husband? 'The forkedone,' quoth he,
'pluck't out, and give it him.'
But there was such laughing!
and Helen so blushed,an Paris so chafed,
and all the rest solaughed, that it passed.
So let it now; for it hasbeen a great while going by.
Well, cousin. I told you athing yesterday; think on't.
So I do.
I'll be sworn 'tistrue; he will weep you,
an 'twere a manborn in April.
And I'll spring up in his tears,an 'twere a nettle against May.
(♪A retreat sounded by horns)
Hark! they are comingfrom the field:
shall we stand up here, and seethem as they pass toward Ilium?
good niece, do, sweetniece Cressida.
At your pleasure.
Here, here, here'san excellent place;
here we may seemost bravely:
I'll tell you them all bytheir names as they pass by;
but mark Troilusabove the rest.
Speak not so loud.
That's AEneas: is notthat a brave man?
he's one of the flowersof Troy, I can tell you:
but mark Troilus;you shall see Troilus anon.
Who's that?
That's Antenor: he has ashrewd wit, I can tell you;
and he's a mangood enough,
he's one o' the soundestjudgments in Troy whosoever,
and a proper manof person.
When comes Troilus? I'llshow you Troilus anon:
if he see me, you shallsee him nod at me.
Will he give you the nod?
You shall see.
If he do, the rich shall havemore.
(♪trumpet sounds)
That's Hector, that, that, lookyou, that; there's a fellow!
Go thy way, Hector! There'sa brave man, niece.
O brave Hector!Look how he looks!
there's a countenance!is't not a brave man?
O, a brave man!
Is a' not? it does aman's heart good.
Look you what hacksare on his helmet!
look you yonder, do yousee? look you there:
there's no jesting;there's laying on,
take't off who will, asthey say: there be hacks!
Be those with swords?
Swords! any thing, he caresnot; an the devil come to him,
it's all one: by God's lid,it does one's heart good.
Yonder comes Paris,yonder comes Paris.
Look ye yonder, niece; is'tnot a gallant man too,
is't not? Why, thisis brave now.
Who said he came hurt hometo-day? he's not hurt:
why, this will do Helen'sheart good now, ha!
Would I could see Troilus now!You shall see Troilus anon.
Who's that?
That's Helenus. I marvelwhere Troilus is.
That's Helenus. I think hewent not forth to-day.
That's Helenus. CanHelenus fight, uncle?
Helenus? no. Yes, he'llfight indifferent well.
I marvel where Troilus is.
Hark! do you not hear thepeople cry 'Troilus'?
Helenus is a priest.
What sneaking fellowcomes yonder?
Where? yonder? that'sDeiphobus. 'Tis Troilus!
there's a man, niece!Hem! Brave Troilus!
the prince of chivalry!
Peace, for shame, peace!
Mark him; note him.O brave Troilus!
Look well upon him, niece: lookyou how his sword is bloodied,
and his helm more hacked thanHector's, and how he looks,
and how he goes! Oadmirable youth!
he ne'er sawthree and twenty.
Go thy way, Troilus,go thy way!
Had I a sister were a grace,or a daughter a goddess,
he should take his choice.O admirable man! Paris?
Paris is dirt to him; and, Iwarrant, Helen, to change,
would give an eye to boot.
Here come more.
Asses, fools, dolts! chaffand bran, chaff and bran!
porridge after meat!
I could live and die i'the eyes of Troilus.
Ne'er look, ne'er look:
the eagles are gone:
crows and daws,crows and daws!
I had rather be sucha man as Troilus
than Agamemnonand all Greece.
There is among theGreeks Achilles,
a better manthan Troilus.
Achilles! a drayman, aporter, a very camel.
Well, well.
'Well, well!' why, haveyou any discretion?
have you any eyes? Doyou know what a man is?
Is not birth, beauty, goodshape, manhood, discourse,
learning, gentleness,virtue, youth, liberality,
and such like, the spiceand salt that season a man?
Ay, a minced man: and then to bebaked with no date in the pie,
for then the man's date's out.
You are such a woman! one knowsnot at what ward you lie.
Upon my back, to defendmy belly; upon my wit,
to defend my wiles;upon my secrecy,
to defend mine honesty; mymask, to defend my beauty;
and you, to defend all these:
and at all these wards Ilie, at a thousand watches.
Say one of your watches.
Nay, I'll watch you for that;
and that's one of thechiefest of them too:
if I cannot ward whatI would not have hit,
I can watch you for tellinghow I took the blow;
unless it swell past hiding,and then it's past watching.
(laughing)
You are such another!
Sir, my lord wouldinstantly speak with you.
Where?
At your own house; therehe unarms him.
Good boy, tell him I come.
I doubt he be hurt. Fareye well, good niece.
Adieu, uncle.
I'll be with you, niece,by and by.
To bring, uncle?
Ay, a token from Troilus.
By the same token, you area bawd.
Words, vows, gifts, tears,and love's full sacrifice,
He offers in another'senterprise;
But more in Troilusthousand fold I see
Than in the glass ofPandar's praise may be;
Yet hold I off. Women areangels, wooing:
Things won are done; joy'ssoul lies in the doing.
That she beloved knowsnought that knows not this:
Men prize the thingungain'd more than it is:
That she was never yetthat ever knew
Love got so sweet as whendesire did sue.
Therefore this maxim outof love I teach:
Achievement is command;ungain'd, beseech:
Then though my heart'scontent firm love doth bear,
Nothing of that shall frommine eyes appear.
Princes,
What grief hath set thejaundice on your cheeks?
The ample proposition thathope makes
In all designs begun onearth below
Fails in thepromised largeness:
cheques and disasters
Grow in the veins ofactions highest rear'd,
As knots, by the confluxof meeting sap,
Infect the sound pine anddivert his grain
Tortive and errant fromhis course of growth.
Nor, princes, is it matternew to us
That we come short of oursuppose so far
That after seven years'siege yet Troy walls stand;
Sith every action thathath gone before,
Whereof we have record,trial did draw
Bias and thwart, notanswering the aim,
And that unbodied figureof the thought
That gave't surmised shape.Why then, you princes,
Do you with cheeks abash'dbehold our works,
And call them shames? whichare indeed nought else
But the protractive trialsof great Jove
To find persistiveconstancy in men:
The fineness of whichmetal is not found
In fortune's love; forthen the bold and coward,
The wise and fool, theartist and unread,
The hard and soft, allaffined and kin:
But, in the wind andtempest of her frown,
Distinction, with a broadand powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnowsthe light away;
And what hath mass ormatter, by itself
Lies rich in virtue andunmingled.
With due observance of thygodlike seat,
Great Agamemnon, Nestorshall apply
Thy latest words. In thereproof of chance
Lies the true proof ofmen: the sea being smooth,
How many shallow baubleboats dare sail
Upon her patient breast,making their way
With those of nobler bulk!
But let the ruffian Boreasonce enrage
The gentle Thetis, andanon behold
The strong-ribb'd barkthrough liquid mountains cut,
Bounding between the twomoist elements,
Like Perseus' horse:where's then the saucy boat
Whose weak untimber'dsides but even now
Co-rivall'd greatness?Either to harbour fled,
Or made a toast for Neptune.
Even so Doth valour's showand valour's worth divide
In storms of fortune; forin her ray and brightness
The herd hath moreannoyance by the breeze
Than by the tiger; butwhen the splitting wind
Makes flexible the kneesof knotted oaks,
And flies fled under shade,why, then the thing of courage
As roused with rage withrage doth sympathize,
And with an accent tunedin selfsame key
Retorts to chidingfortune.
Agamemnon,
Thou great commander,nerve and bone of Greece,
Heart of our numbers, souland only spirit.
In whom the tempers andthe minds of all
Should be shut up, hearwhat Ulysses speaks.
Besides the applauseand approbation
To which, most mightyfor thy place and sway,
And thou most reverend forthy stretch'd-out life
I give to both yourspeeches, which were such
As Agamemnon and the handof Greece
Should hold up high inbrass, and such again
As venerable Nestor,hatch'd in silver,
Should with a bond of air,strong as the axle-tree
On which heaven rides,knit all the Greekish ears
To his experienced tongue,yet let it please both,
Thou great, and wise, tohear Ulysses speak.
Speak, prince of Ithaca;and be't of less expect
That matter needless, ofimportless burden,
Divide thy lips, than weare confident,
When rank Thersites opeshis mastic jaws,
We shall hear music, witand oracle.
Troy, yet upon his basis,had been down,
And the great Hector'ssword had lack'd a master,
But for these instances.
The specialty of rule hathbeen neglected:
And, look, how manyGrecian tents do stand
Hollow upon this plain, somany hollow factions.
When that the general isnot like the hive
To whom the foragers shallall repair,
What honey is expected?Degree being vizarded,
The unworthiest shows asfairly in the mask.
The heavens themselves, theplanets and this centre
Observe degree, priorityand shape,
Insisture, course,proportion, season, form,
Office and custom, in allline of order;
And therefore is theglorious planet Sol
In noble eminenceenthroned and sphered
Amidst the other; whosemedicinable eye
Corrects the ill aspectsof planets evil,
And posts, like thecommandment of a king,
Sans cheque to good andbad: but when the planets
In evil mixture todisorder wander,
What plagues and whatportents! what mutiny!
What raging of the sea!shaking of earth!
Commotion in the winds!frights, horrors, changes,
Divert and crack, rend andderacinate
The unity and married calmof states
Quite from their fixure!O, when degree is shaked,
Which is the ladder to allhigh designs,
Then enterprise is sick!How could communities,
Degrees in schools andbrotherhoods in cities,
Peaceful commerce fromdividable shores,
The primogenitive and dueof birth,
Prerogative of age,crowns, sceptres, laurels,
But by degree, stand inauthentic place?
Take but degree away,untune that string,
And, hark, what discordfollows! each thing meets
In mere oppugnancy: thebounded waters
Should lift their bosomshigher than the shores
And make a sop of all thissolid globe:
Strength should be lord ofimbecility,
And the rude son shouldstrike his father dead:
Force should be right; orrather, right and wrong,
Between whose endless jarjustice resides,
Should lose their names,and so should justice too.
Then every thing includesitself in power,
Power into will, will intoappetite;
And appetite, an universalwolf,
So doubly seconded withwill and power,
Must make perforce anuniversal prey,
And last eat up himself.Great Agamemnon,
This chaos, when degree issuffocate,
Follows the choking.
And this neglection ofdegree it is
That by a pace goesbackward, with a purpose
It hath to climb. Thegeneral's disdain'd
By him one step below, heby the next,
That next by him beneath;so every step,
Exampled by the first pacethat is sick
Of his superior, grows toan envious fever
Of pale and bloodlessemulation:
And 'tis this fever thatkeeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinews. To enda tale of length,
Troy in our weakness stands,not in her strength.
Most wisely hath Ulysseshere discover'd
The fever whereof all ourpower is sick.
The nature of the sicknessfound, Ulysses,
What is the remedy?
The great Achilles, whomopinion crowns
The sinew and the forehandof our host,
Having his ear full of hisairy fame,
Grows dainty of his worth,and in his tent
Lies mocking our designs:with him Patroclus
Upon a lazy bed thelivelong day
Breaks scurril jests;
And with ridiculous andawkward action,
Which, slanderer, heimitation calls,
He pageants us. Sometime,great Agamemnon,
Thy topless deputation heputs on,
And, like a strutting player,
whose conceit Liesin his hamstring,
and doth think it rich
To hear the woodendialogue and sound
'Twixt his stretch'd footingand the scaffoldage,--
Such to-be-pitied ando'er-wrested seeming
He acts thy greatness in:and when he speaks,
'Tis like a chime a-mending;with terms unsquared,
Which, from the tongue ofroaring Typhon dropp'd
Would seem hyperboles. Atthis fusty stuff
The large Achilles, on hispress'd bed lolling,
From his deep chest laughsout a loud applause;
Cries 'Excellent! 'tisAgamemnon right.
Now play me Nestor; hem,and stroke thy beard,
As he being drest to someoration.'
That's done, as near asthe extremest ends
Of parallels, as like asVulcan and his wife:
Yet god Achilles stillcries 'Excellent!
'Tis Nestor right. Nowplay him me, Patroclus,
Arming to answer in anight alarm.'
And then, forsooth, thefaint defects of age
Must be the scene ofmirth; to cough and spit,
And, with a palsy-fumblingon his gorget,
Shake in and out therivet: and at this sport
Sir Valour dies; cries 'O,enough, Patroclus;
Or give me ribs of steel!I shall split all
In pleasure of my spleen.'And in this fashion,
All our abilities, gifts,natures, shapes,
Severals and generals ofgrace exact,
Achievements, plots,orders, preventions,
Excitements to the field,or speech for truce,
Success or loss,what is or is not,
serves As stuff for thesetwo to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation ofthese twain--
Who, as Ulysses says,opinion crowns
With an imperialvoice--many are infect.
Ajax is grown self-will'd,and bears his head
In such a rein, in full asproud a place
As broad Achilles; keepshis tent like him;
Makes factious feasts;rails on our state of war,
Bold as an oracle, andsets Thersites,
A slave whose gall coinsslanders like a mint,
To match us in comparisonswith dirt,
To weaken and discreditour exposure,
How rank soever rounded inwith danger.
They tax our policy, andcall it cowardice,
Count wisdom as no memberof the war,
Forestall prescience, andesteem no act
But that of hand: thestill and mental parts,
That do contrive how manyhands shall strike,
When fitness calls themon, and know by measure
Of their observant toilthe enemies' weight,--
Why, this hath not afinger's dignity:
They call this bed-work,mappery, closet-war;
So that the ram thatbatters down the wall,
For the great swing andrudeness of his poise,
They place before his handthat made the engine,
Or those that with thefineness of their souls
By reason guide hisexecution.
Let this be granted, andAchilles' horse
Makes many Thetis' sons.
(♪trumpet)
What trumpet? look,Menelaus.
From Troy.
Is this great Agamemnon'stent, I pray you?
Even this.
May one, that is a heraldand a prince,
Do a fair message to hiskingly eye?
With surety stronger thanAchilles' arm
'Fore all the Greekishheads, which with one voice
Call Agamemnon head andgeneral.
Fair leave and large security.
How may A stranger tothose most imperial looks
Know them from eyes ofother mortals?
How!
Ay;
I ask, that I might wakenreverence,
And bid the cheek be readywith a blush
Modest as morning when shecoldly eyes
The youthful Phoebus:
Which is that god inoffice, guiding men?
Which is the high andmighty Agamemnon?
This Trojan scorns us; orthe men of Troy
Are ceremonious courtiers.
Courtiers as free, asdebonair, unarm'd,
As bending angels; that'stheir fame in peace:
But when they would seemsoldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strongjoints, true swords;
and, great Jove's accord,
Nothing so full of heart.But peace, AEneas,
Peace, Trojan; lay thyfinger on thy lips!
The worthiness of praisedistains his worth,
If that the praised himselfbring the praise forth:
But what the repiningenemy commends,
That breath fame blows; thatpraise, sole pure, transcends.
Sir, you of Troy, call youyourself AEneas?
Ay, Greek, that is myname.
What's your affair I prayyou?
Sir, pardon; 'tis forAgamemnon's ears.
He hears naught privatelythat comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come notto whisper him:
I bring a trumpet to arousehis senses,
To set his sense on theattentive bent,
And then to speak.
Speak frankly as the wind;
It is not Agamemnon'ssleeping hour:
That thou shalt know.Trojan, he is awake,
He tells thee so himself.
Trumpet, blow loud,
Send thy brass voice throughall these lazy tents;
And every Greek of mettle,let him know,
What Troy means fairlyshall be spoke aloud.
(♪trumpet sounds)
We have, great Agamemnon,here in Troy
A prince call'd Hector,--Priamis his father,--
Who in this dull andlong-continued truce
Is rusty grown: he bade metake a trumpet,
And to this purpose speak.Kings, princes, lords!
If there be one among thefair'st of Greece
That holds his honourhigher than his ease,
That seeks his praise morethan he fears his peril,
That knows his valour, andknows not his fear,
That loves his mistressmore than in confession,
With truant vows to herown lips he loves,
And dare avow her beautyand her worth
In other arms than hers,--tohim this challenge.
Hector, in view of Trojansand of Greeks,
Shall make it good, or dohis best to do it,
He hath a lady, wiser,fairer, truer,
Than ever Greek didcompass in his arms,
And will to-morrow withhis trumpet call
Midway between your tentsand walls of Troy,
To rouse a Grecian that istrue in love:
If any come, Hector shallhonour him;
If none, he'll say in Troywhen he retires,
The Grecian dames aresunburnt and not worth
The splinter of a lance.Even so much.
This shall be told ourlovers, Lord AEneas;
If none of them have soulin such a kind,
We left them all at home:but we are soldiers;
And may that soldier amere recreant prove,
That means not, hath not,or is not in love!
If then one is, or hath,or means to be,
That one meets Hector; ifnone else, I am he.
Tell him of Nestor, onethat was a man
When Hector's grandsiresuck'd: he is old now;
But if there be not in ourGrecian host
One noble man that hathone spark of fire,
To answer for his love,tell him from me
I'll hide my silver beardin a gold beaver
And in my vantbrace putthis wither'd brawn,
And meeting him will tellhim that my lady
Was fairer than hisgrandam and as chaste
As may be in the world:his youth in flood,
I'll prove this truth withmy three drops of blood.
Now heavens forbid suchscarcity of youth!
Amen.
Fair Lord AEneas, let metouch your hand;
To our pavilion shall Ilead you, sir.
Achilles shall have wordof this intent;
So shall each lord ofGreece, from tent to tent:
Yourself shall feast withus before you go
And find the welcome of anoble foe.
Nestor!
What says Ulysses?
I have a young conceptionin my brain;
Be you my time to bring itto some shape.
What is't?
This 'tis:
Blunt wedges rive hardknots: the seeded pride
That hath to this maturityblown up
In rank Achilles must ornow be cropp'd,
Or, shedding, breed anursery of like evil,
To overbulk us all.
Well, and how?
This challenge that thegallant Hector sends,
However it is spread ingeneral name,
Relates in purpose only toAchilles.
The purpose is perspicuouseven as substance,
Whose grossness littlecharacters sum up:
And, in the publication,make no strain,
But that Achilles, werehis brain as barren
As banks of Libya,--though,Apollo knows, 'Tis dry enough,
--will, with greatspeed of judgment,
Ay, with celerity, findHector's purpose
Pointing on him.
And wake him to theanswer, think you?
Yes, 'tis most meet: whommay you else oppose,
That can from Hector bringhis honour off,
If not Achilles? Though'tbe a sportful combat,
Yet in the trial muchopinion dwells;
For here the Trojans tasteour dear'st repute
With their finest palate:and trust to me, Ulysses,
Our imputation shall beoddly poised
In this wild action; forthe success,
Although particular, shallgive a scantling
Of good or bad unto thegeneral;
And in such indexes,although small pricks
To their subsequentvolumes, there is seen
The baby figure of thegiant mass
Of things to come atlarge. It is supposed
He that meets Hectorissues from our choice
And choice, being mutualact of all our souls,
Makes merit her election,and doth boil,
As 'twere from us all, aman distill'd
Out of our virtues; whomiscarrying,
What heart receives fromhence the conquering part,
To steel a strong opinionto themselves?
Which entertain'd, limbsare his instruments,
In no less working thanare swords and bows
Directive by the limbs.
Give pardon to my speech:
Therefore 'tis meetAchilles meet not Hector.
Let us, like merchants,show our foulest wares,
And think, perchance,they'll sell; if not,
The lustre of the betteryet to show,
Shall show the better. Byshowing the worst first.
Do not consent
That ever Hector andAchilles meet;
For both our honour andour shame in this
Are dogg'd with twostrange followers.
I see them not with my oldeyes: what are they?
What glory our Achillesshares from Hector,
Were he not proud, we allshould share with him:
But he already is tooinsolent;
And we were better parchin Afric sun
Than in the pride and saltscorn of his eyes,
Should he 'scape Hectorfair:
No no, make a lottery;
And, by device, letblockish Ajax draw
The sort to fight withHector:
Give him allowance for thebetter man;
For that will physic thegreat Myrmidon
Who broils in loudapplause, and make him fall
His crest that prouderthan blue Iris bends.
If the dull brainless Ajaxcome safe off,
We'll dress him up invoices: if he fail,
Yet go we under ouropinion still
That we have better men.But, hit or miss,
Our project's life thisshape of sense assumes:
Ajax employ'd plucks downAchilles' plumes.
Now Ulysses, I begin to relishthy advice;
And I will give a taste ofit forthwith To Agamemnon:
go we to him straight.
Two curs shall tame eachother: pride alone
Must tarre the mastiffson, as 'twere their bone.
Agamemnon, how if he had boils?full, all over, generally?
Thersites!
And those boils did run? say so:did not the general run then?
were not that a botchy core?
Dog!
Then would come some matterfrom him; I see none now.
Thou bitch-wolf's son,canst thou not hear?
Feel, then.
The plague of Greece upon thee,thou mongrel beef-witted lord!
Speak then, thouvinewedst leaven, speak:
I will beat theeinto handsomeness.
I shall sooner rail theeinto wit and holiness:
but, I think, thy horsewill sooner con an oration
than thou learn a prayer withoutbook. Thou canst strike,
canst thou? a red murraino' thy jade's tricks!
Toadstool, learn me theproclamation.
Dost thou think I have nosense, thou strikest me thus?
The proclamation!
Thou art proclaimed afool, I think.
Do not, porpentine, donot: my fingers itch.
I would thou didst itchfrom head to foot
and I had thescratching of thee;
I would make thee theloathsomest scab in Greece.
I say, the proclamation!
Thou grumblest and railestevery hour on Achilles,
and thou art as full of envyat his greatness as Cerberus
is at Proserpine's beauty,
Mistress Thersites!
Thou shouldest strike him.
He would pun thee intoshivers with his fist,
as a sailor breaks a biscuit.
You whoreson cur!
Do, do.
Thou stool for a witch!
Ay, do, do; thousodden-witted lord!
thou hast no more brain thanI have in mine elbows;
thou art here butto thrash Trojans;
and thou art bought and soldamong those of any wit,
like a barbarian slave.
thou thing of no bowels, thou!
You dog!
You scurvy lord!
You cur!
Why, how now, Ajax!wherefore do you thus?
How now, Thersites!what's the matter, man?
You see him there, do you?
Ay; what's the matter?
Nay, look upon him.
So I do: what's thematter?
Nay, but regard him well.
'Well!' why, I do so.
But yet you looknot well upon him;
for whosoever you takehim to be, he is Ajax.
I know that, fool.
Ay, but that fool knowsnot himself.
Therefore I beat thee.
Lo, lo, lo, lo, whatmodicums of wit he utters!
his evasions haveears thus long.
I have bobbed his brain morethan he has beat my bones:
This lord, Ajax, whowears his wit in his belly
and his guts in his head, I'lltell you what I say of him.
What?
I say, this Ajax--
Nay, good Ajax.
Has not so much wit--
Nay, I must hold you.
As will stop the eyeof Helen's needle,
for whom hecomes to fight.
Will thou set thy wit to afool's?
No, I warrant you; for afools will shame it.
Good words, Thersites.
What's the quarrel?
I bade the vile owl go learn methe tenor of the proclamation,
and he rails upon me.
I serve thee not.
Well, go to, go to.
I serve here voluntarily.
Your last servicewas sufferance,
'twas not voluntary: noman is beaten voluntary:
Ajax was here the voluntary,and you as under an impress.
E'en so; a great deal of yourwit, too, lies in your sinews,
or else there be liars.Hector have a great catch,
if he knock out eitherof your brains:
a' were as good crack afusty nut with no kernel.
What, with me too,Thersites?
There's Ulysses and oldNestor, whose wit was mouldy
ere your grandsires hadnails on their toes,
yoke you like draught-oxen andmake you plough up the wars.
What, what?
Yes, good sooth:
I shall cut out yourtongue.
'Tis no matter! I shall speakas much as thou afterwards.
No more words, Thersites;peace!
I will hold my peace
when Achilles' brachbids me, shall I?
There's for you, Patroclus.
I will see you hanged,like clotpoles,
ere I come any moreto your tents:
I will keep wherethere is wit stirring
and leave thefaction of fools.
A good riddance.
Marry, this, sir, is proclaim'dthrough all our host:
That Hector, by the fifthhour of the sun,
Will with a trumpet callsome knight to arms
That hath a stomach;
and such a one thatdare Maintain
--I know not what:'tis trash. Farewell.
Farewell. Who shall answerhim?
I know not: 'tis put tolottery; otherwise
He knew his man.
O, meaning you. I will golearn more of it.
After so many hours,lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again saysNestor from the Greeks:
'Deliver Helen, and alldamage else--
As honour, loss of time,travail, expense,
Wounds, friends, and whatelse dear that is consumed
In hot digestion of thiscormorant war--
Shall be struck off.'Hector, what say you to't?
Though no man lesser fearsthe Greeks than I
As far as toucheth myparticular,
Yet, dread Priam,
There is no lady of moresofter bowels,
More spongy to suck in thesense of fear,
More ready to cry out 'Whoknows what follows?'
Than Hector is: the woundof peace is surety,
Surety secure; but modestdoubt is call'd
The beacon of the wise,the tent that searches
To the bottom of theworst. Let Helen go:
Since the first sword wasdrawn about this question,
Every tithe soul, 'mongstmany thousand dismes,
Hath been as dear asHelen; I mean, of ours:
If we have lost so manytenths of ours,
To guard a thing not oursnor worth to us,
Had it our name, the valueof one ten,
What merit's in thatreason which denies
The yielding of her up?
Fie, fie, my brother!
Weigh you the worth andhonour of a king
So great as our dreadfather in a scale
Of common ounces? will youwith counters sum
The past proportion of hisinfinite?
And buckle in a scale mostfathomless
With spans and inches sodiminutive
As fears and reasons?
If we talk of reason, Let'sshut our gates and sleep:
manhood and honour Shouldhave hare-hearts,
would they but fattheir thoughts
With this cramm'dreason:
reason and respect Make liverspale and lustihood deject.
Brother, she is not worth whatshe doth cost The keeping.
What is aught, but as 'tisvalued?
But value dwells not inparticular will;
It holds his estimate anddignity
As well wherein 'tisprecious of itself
As in the prizer: 'tis madidolatry
To make the servicegreater than the god
And the will dotes that isattributive
To what infectiouslyitself affects,
Without some image of theaffected merit.
I take to-day a wife, andmy election
Is led on in the conductof my will;
My will enkindled by mineeyes and ears,
Two traded pilots 'twixtthe dangerous shores
Of will and judgment: howmay I avoid,
Although my will distastewhat it elected,
The wife I chose? therecan be no evasion
To blench from this and tostand firm by honour:
We turn not back the silksupon the merchant,
When we have soil'd them,nor the remainder viands
We do not throw inunrespective sieve,
Because we now are full.It was thought meet
Paris should do somevengeance on the Greeks:
Your breath of fullconsent bellied his sails;
The seas and winds, oldwranglers, took a truce
And did him service: hetouch'd the ports desired,
And for an old aunt whomthe Greeks held captive,
He brought a Grecian queen,whose youth and freshness
Wrinkles Apollo's, andmakes stale the morning.
Why keep we her? theGrecians keep our aunt:
Is she worth keeping? why,she is a pearl,
Whose price hath launch'dabove a thousand ships,
And turn'd crown'd kingsto merchants.
If you'll avouch 'twaswisdom Paris went--
As you must needs, for youall cried 'Go, go,'--
If you'll confess hebrought home worthy prize--
As you must needs, for youall clapp'd your hands
And cried 'Inestimable!'--whydo you now
The issue of your properwisdoms rate,
And do a deed that fortunenever did,
Beggar the estimationwhich you prized
Richer than sea and land?O, theft most base,
That we have stol'n whatwe do fear to keep!
Cry, Trojans, cry!
What noise? what shriek isthis?
Cry, Trojans!
Cry, Trojans, cry! lend meten thousand eyes,
And I will fill them withprophetic tears.
Peace, sister, Peace!!
Virgins and boys, mid-ageand wrinkled eld,
Soft infancy, that nothingcanst but cry,
Add to my clamours! let uspay betimes
A moiety of that mass ofmoan to come.
Cry, Trojans, cry! practiseyour eyes with tears!
Troy must not be, norgoodly Ilion stand;
Our firebrand brother,Paris, burns us all.
Cry, Trojans, cry! a Helenand a woe:
Cry, cry! Troy burns, orelse let Helen go.
Now, youthful Troilus, donot these high strains
Of divination in oursister work
Some touches of remorse?or is your blood
So madly hot that nodiscourse of reason,
Nor fear of bad success ina bad cause,
Can qualify the same?
Why, brother Hector,
We may not think thejustness of each act
Such and no other thanevent doth form it,
Nor once deject thecourage of our minds,
Because Cassandra's mad:her brain-sick raptures
Cannot distaste thegoodness of a quarrel
Which hath our severalhonours all engaged
To make it gracious. Formy private part,
I am no more touch'd thanall Priam's sons:
And Jove forbid thereshould be done amongst us
Such things as mightoffend the weakest spleen
To fight for and maintain!
Else might the worldconvince of levity
As well my undertakings asyour counsels:
But I attest the gods,your full consent
Gave wings to mypropension and cut off
All fears attending on sodire a project.
For what, alas, can thesemy single arms?
What Propugnation is inone man's valour,
To stand the push andenmity of those
This quarrel would excite?Yet, I protest,
Were I alone to pass thedifficulties
And had as ample power asI have will,
Paris should ne'er retractwhat he hath done,
Nor faint in the pursuit.
Paris, you speakLike one besotted
on your sweet delights:
You have the honey still,but these the gall;
So to be valiant is nopraise at all.
Sir, I propose not merelyto myself
The pleasures such abeauty brings with it;
But I would have the soilof her fair rape
Wiped off, in honourablekeeping her.
What treason were it tothe ransack'd queen,
Disgrace to your greatworths and shame to me,
Now to deliver herpossession up
On terms of base compulsion!
Can it be That so degeneratea strain as this
Should once set footing inyour generous bosoms?
There's not the meanestspirit on our party
Without a heart to dare orsword to draw
When Helen is defended,nor none so noble
Whose life were illbestow'd or death unfamed
Where Helen is thesubject; then, I say,
Well may we fight for herwhom, we know well,
The world's large spacescannot parallel.
Paris and Troilus, youhave both said well,
And on the cause andquestion now in hand
Have glozed, but superficially:
not much Unlike young men,whom Aristotle thought
Unfit to hear moralphilosophy:
The reasons you allege domore conduce
To the hot passion ofdistemper'd blood
Than to make up a freedetermination
'Twixt right and wrong,for pleasure and revenge
Have ears more deaf thanadders to the voice
Of any true decision.Nature craves
All dues be render'd totheir owners: now,
What nearer debt in allhumanity
Than wife is to thehusband? If this law
Of nature be corruptedthrough affection,
And that great minds, ofpartial indulgence
To their benumbed wills,resist the same,
There is a law in eachwell-order'd nation
To curb those ragingappetites which are
Most disobedient andrefractory.
If Helen then be wife toSparta's king,
As it is known she is,these moral laws
Of nature and of nationsspeak aloud
To have her back return'd:thus to persist
In doing wrong extenuatesnot wrong,
But makes it much more heavy.
Hector's opinion Isthis in way of truth;
yet ne'ertheless, My spritelybrethren, I propend to you
In resolution to keepHelen still,
For 'tis a cause that hathno mean dependance
Upon our joint and severaldignities.
Why, there you touch'd thelife of our design:
Were it not glory that wemore affected
Than the performance ofour heaving spleens,
I would not wish a drop ofTrojan blood
Spent more in her defence.But, worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honourand renown,
A spur to valiant andmagnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage maybeat down our foes,
And fame in time to comecanonize us;
For, I presume, braveHector would not lose
So rich advantage of apromised glory
As smiles upon theforehead of this action
For the wide world'srevenue.
I am yours,
You valiant offspring ofgreat Priamus.
I have a roistingchallenge sent amongst
The dun and factiousnobles of the Greeks
Will strike amazement totheir drowsy spirits:
I was advertised theirgreat general slept,
Whilst emulation in thearmy crept:
This, I presume, will wakehim.
How now, Thersites! what lostin the labyrinth of thy fury!
Shall the elephantAjax carry it thus?
He beats me, and I rail athim: O, worthy satisfaction!
would it were otherwise;that I could beat him,
whilst he railed at me.'Sfoot, I'll learn to conjure
and raise devils, butI'll see some issue
of my spiteful execrations.Then there's Achilles,
a rare enginer! IfTroy be not taken
till these two undermine it,
the walls will stand tillthey fall of themselves.
O thou great thunder-darterof Olympus,
forget that thou art Jove, theking of gods and, Mercury,
lose all the serpentinecraft of thy caduceus,
if ye take not that little,little less than little wit
from them that they have!
which short-armedignorance itself
knows is so abundant scarce,
it will not in circumventiondeliver a fly from a spider,
without drawingtheir massy irons
and cutting the web.
After this, the vengeanceon the whole camp!
or rather, theneopolitan bone-ache!
for that, methinks, isthe curse dependent
on those that warfor a placket.
I have said my prayersand devil Envy say Amen.
What ho! my Lord Achilles!
Who's there? Thersites! GoodThersites, come in and rail.
If I could have remembereda gilt counterfeit,
thou wouldst not have slippedout of my contemplation:
but it is no matter;thyself upon thyself!
The common curse of mankind,folly and ignorance,
be thine in great revenue!
Let thy blood be thydirection till thy death!
Where's Achilles?
What, art thou devout?wast thou in prayer?
Ay: the heavens hear me!
Amen.
Who's there?
Thersites, my lord.
Where, where? Art thou come?why, my cheese, my digestion,
why hast thou not served thyselfin to my table so many meals?
Come, what's Agamemnon?
Thy commander, Achilles.Then tell me, Patroclus,
what's Achilles?
Thy lord, Thersites: thentell me, I pray thee,
what's Thersites?
Thy knower, Patroclus:then tell me, Patroclus,
what art thou?
Thou mayst tell thatknowest.
O, tell, tell.
I'll decline the whole question.Agamemnon commands Achilles;
Achilles is my lord; Iam Patroclus' knower,
and Patroclus is a fool.
You rascal!
Peace, fool! I have notdone.
He is a privileged man.Proceed, Thersites.
Agamemnon is a fool;Achilles is a fool;
Thersites is a fool, and, asaforesaid, Patroclus is a fool.
Derive this; come.
Agamemnon is a fool tooffer to command Achilles;
Achilles is a fool to becommanded of Agamemnon;
Thersites is a fool toserve such a fool,
and Patroclus isa fool positive.
Why am I a fool?
Make that demand of the creater.It suffices me thou art.
Look you, who comes here?
Patroclus, I'll speak withnobody.
Come in with me,Thersites.
Here is such patchery, suchjuggling and such knavery!
all the argument is a whore anda cuckold;
a good quarrel to drawemulous factions
and bleed to death upon.
Now, and war andlechery confound all!
Where is Achilles?
Within his tent; but illdisposed, my lord.
Let it be known to himthat we are here.
He shent our messengers;and we lay by
Our appertainments,visiting of him:
Let him be told so; lestperchance he think
We dare not move thequestion of our place,
Or know not what we are.
I shall say so to him.
We saw him at the openingof his tent:
He is not sick.
Yes, lion-sick, sick ofproud heart: you may call it
melancholy, if you will favourthe man; but, by my head,
'tis pride: but why, why?let him show us the cause.
A word, my lord.
What moves Ajax thus tobay at him?
Achilles hath inveigledhis fool from him.
Who, Thersites?
He.
Then will Ajax lack matter,if he have lost his argument.
No, you see, heis his argument
that has hisargument, Achilles.
All the better; theirfraction is more our wish
than their faction:
but it was a strong composurea fool could disunite.
The amity that wisdom knitsnot, folly may easily untie.
Here comes Patroclus.
No Achilles with him.
The elephant hath joints,but none for courtesy:
his legs are legs fornecessity, not for flexure.
Achilles bids me say, heis much sorry,
If any thing more thanyour sport and pleasure
Did move your greatnessand this noble state
To call upon him; he hopesit is no other
But for your health andyour digestion sake,
And after-dinner's breath.
Hear you, Patroclus:
We are too well acquaintedwith these answers:
But his evasion, wing'dthus swift with scorn,
Cannot outfly ourapprehensions.
Much attribute he hath,and much the reason
Why we ascribe it to him;yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously on his ownpart beheld,
Do in our eyes begin tolose their gloss,
Yea, like fair fruit in anunwholesome dish,
Are like to rot untasted.Go and tell him,
We come to speak with him;and you shall not sin,
If you do say we think himover-proud
And under-honest, inself-assumption greater
Than in the note of judgment;
and worthier than himself
Here tend the savagestrangeness he puts on,
Disguise the holy strengthof their command,
And underwrite in anobserving kind
His humorous predominance;yea, watch
His pettish lunes,his ebbs, his flows,
as if The passage and wholecarriage of this action
Rode on his tide. Go tellhim this, and add,
That if he overhold hisprice so much,
We'll none of him; but lethim, like an engine
Not portable, lie underthis report:
'Bring action hither, thiscannot go to war:
A stirring dwarf we doallowance give
Before a sleeping giant.'Tell him so.
I shall; and bring hisanswer presently.
In second voice we'll notbe satisfied;
We come to speak with him.Ulysses, enter you.
What is he more thananother?
No more than what hethinks he is.
Is he so much?
Do you not think he thinkshimself a better man than I am?
No question.
Will you subscribe histhought, and say he is?
No, noble Ajax; you areas strong, as valiant,
as wise, no less noble,much more gentle,
and altogether more tractable.
Why should a man be proud?How doth pride grow?
I know not what pride is.
Your mind is the fairer, Ajax,
and your virtues the clearer.
He that is proudeats up himself:
pride is his own glass, his owntrumpet, his own chronicle;
and whatever praisesitself but in the deed,
devours the deed in the praise.
I do hate a proud man, as Ihate the engendering of toads.
Yet he loves himself: is'tnot strange?
Achilles will not to thefield to-morrow.
What's his excuse?
He doth rely on none,
But carries on the streamof his dispose
Without observance orrespect of any,
In will peculiar and inself-admission.
Why will he not upon ourfair request
Untent his person andshare the air with us?
Things small as nothing,for request's sake only,
He makes important: possess'dhe is with greatness,
And speaks not to himselfbut with a pride
That quarrels atself-breath: imagined worth
Holds in his blood suchswoln and hot discourse
That 'twixt his mental andhis active parts
Kingdom'd Achilles incommotion rages
And batters down himself:what should I say?
He is so plaguy proud thatthe death-tokens of it
Cry 'No recovery.'
Let Ajax go to him.
Dear lord, go you andgreet him in his tent:
'Tis said he holds you well,and will be led
At your request a littlefrom himself.
O Agamemnon, let it not beso!
We'll consecrate the stepsthat Ajax makes
When they go from Achilles:shall the proud lord
That bastes his arrogancewith his own seam
And never suffers matterof the world
Enter his thoughts, savesuch as do revolve
And ruminate himself,shall he be worshipp'd
Of that we hold an idolmore than he?
No, this thrice worthy andright valiant lord
Must not so stale hispalm, nobly acquired;
Nor, by my will,assubjugate his merit,
As amply titled asAchilles is,
By going to Achilles:
That were to enlard hisfat already pride
And add more coals toCancer when he burns
With entertaining greatHyperion.
This lord go to him!Jupiter forbid,
And say in thunder'Achilles go to him.'
O, this is well; herubs the vein of him.
And how his silencedrinks up this applause!
If I go to him,with my armed fist
I'll pash him o'erthe face.
O, no, you shall not go.
An a' be proud with me,I'll pheeze his pride:
Let me go to him.
Not for the worth thathangs upon our quarrel.
A paltry, insolent fellow!
How he describes himself!
Can he not be sociable?
The raven chidesblackness.
I'll let his humoursblood.
He will be the physicianthat should be the patient.
An all men were o' mymind,--
Wit would be out offashion.
A' should not bear it so,a' should eat swords first:
shall pride carry it?
An 'twould, you'ld carryhalf.
A' would have ten shares.
I will knead him; I'llmake him supple.
He's not yet through warm:force him with praises:
pour in, pour in; hisambition is dry.
My lord, you feed too muchon this dislike.
Our noble general, do notdo so.
You must prepare to fightwithout Achilles.
Why, 'tis this naming ofhim does him harm.
Here is a lord--but 'tisbefore his face;
I will be silent.
Wherefore should you so?
He is not emulous, asAchilles is.
Know the whole world, heis as valiant.
A whoreson dog, that shallpelter thus with us!
Would he were a Trojan!
What a vice were it inAjax now,--
If he were proud,--
Or covetous of praise,--
Ay, or surly borne,--
Or strange, orself-affected!
Thank the heavens, lord,thou art of sweet composure;
Praise him that got thee,she that gave thee suck:
Famed be thy tutor, andthy parts of nature
Thrice famed, beyond allerudition:
But he that disciplinedthy arms to fight,
Let Mars divide eternityin twain,
And give him half: and,for thy vigour,
Bull-bearing Milo hisaddition yield
To sinewy Ajax. I will notpraise thy wisdom,
Which, like a bourn, apale, a shore, confines
Thy spacious and dilatedparts: here's Nestor;
Instructed by theantiquary times,
He must, he is, he cannotbut be wise:
Put pardon, father Nestor,were your days
As green as Ajax' and yourbrain so temper'd,
You should not have theeminence of him,
But be as Ajax.
Shall I call you father?
Ay, my good son.
Be ruled by him, LordAjax.
There is no tarrying here;the hart Achilles
Keeps thicket. Please itour great general
To call together all hisstate of war;
Fresh kings are come toTroy: to-morrow
We must with all our mainof power stand fast:
And here's a lord,--comeknights from east to west,
And cull their flower,Ajax shall cope the best.
Go we to council. LetAchilles sleep:
Light boats sail swift, thoughgreater hulks draw deep.
Friend, you! pray you, a word:
do not you follow theyoung Lord Paris?
Ay, sir, when he goesbefore me.
You depend upon him, Imean?
Sir, I do depend upon thelord.
You depend upon anoble gentleman;
I must needs praise him.
The lord be praised!
You know me, do you not?
Faith, sir, superficially.
Friend, know me better; Iam the Lord Pandarus.
I hope I shall know yourhonour better.
I do desire it.
You are in the state ofgrace.
Grace! not so, friend: honourand lordship are my titles.
(♪music within)
What music is this?
I do but partly know, sir:it is music in parts.
Know you the musicians?
Wholly, sir.
Who play they to?
To the hearers, sir.
At whose pleasure, friend
At mine, sir, and theirsthat love music.
Command, I mean, friend.
Who shall I command, sir?
Friend, we understandnot one another:
I am too courtly andthou art too cunning.
At whose request dothese men play?
That's to 't indeed,sir: marry, sir,
at the request ofParis my lord,
who's there inperson; with him,
the mortal Venus, theheart-blood of beauty,
love's invisible soul,--
Who, my cousin Cressida?
No, sir, Helen:
could you not find outthat by her attributes?
It should seem, fellow,
that thou hast not seenthe Lady Cressida.
I come to speak with Parisfrom the Prince Troilus:
I will make acomplimental assault
upon him, for my businessseethes.
Sodden business! there's astewed phrase indeed!
Fair be to you, my lord, andto all this fair company!
fair desires, inall fair measure,
fairly guide them! especiallyto you, fair queen!
fair thoughts be your fairpillow!
Dear lord, you are full offair words.
You speak your fairpleasure, sweet queen.
Fair prince, here isgood broken music.
You have broke it,cousin: and, by my life,
you shall make it whole again;you shall piece it out
with a piece ofyour performance.
Nell, he is full of harmony.
Truly, lady, no.
O, sir,--
Rude, in sooth; in goodsooth, very rude.
Well said, my lord!
I have business to mylord, dear queen.
My lord, will youvouchsafe me a word?
Nay, this shallnot hedge us out:
we'll hear yousing, certainly.
Well, sweet queen. youare pleasant with me.
But, marry, thus, my lord:
my dear lord and most esteemedfriend, your brother Troilus,--
My Lord Pandarus;honey-sweet lord,--
Go to, sweet queen, to go:
--commends himself mostaffectionately to you,--
You shall not bob us outof our melody: if you do,
our melancholy upon yourhead!
Sweet queen, sweet queen!that's a sweet queen, i' faith.
And to make a sweet ladysad is a sour offence.
Nay, that shall notserve your turn;
that shall not, in truth, la.Nay, I care not for such words;
no, no. And, my lord, hedesires you, that if the king
call for him at supper,you will make his excuse.
My Lord Pandarus,--
What says my sweet queen,my very very sweet queen?
What exploit's in hand?where sups he to-night?
Nay, but, my lord,--
What says my sweet queen?
You must notknow where he sups.
I'll lay my life, with mydisposer Cressida.
No, no, no suchmatter; you are wide:
come, your disposer is sick.
Well, I'll make excuse.
Ay, good my lord. Whyshould you say Cressida?
no, your poordisposer's sick.
I spy.
You spy! what do you spy?Come, give me an instrument.
Now, sweet queen.
Why, this is kindly done.
My niece is horribly in love
with a thing youhave.
She shall have it, my lord,if it be not my lord Paris.
He! no, she'll none ofhim; they two are twain.
My cousin will fall out withyou.
Falling in, after fallingout, may make them three.
Come, come, I'll hearno more of this;
I'll sing you a song now.
Ay, ay, prithee now. Bymy troth, sweet lord,
thou hast a fine forehead.
Ay, you may, you may.
Let thy song be love: thislove will undo us all.
Love! ay, that it shall,i' faith.
Ay, good now, love, love,nothing but love.
In good troth, it beginsso.
(♪Sings)
Love, love, nothing butlove, still love. still more!
For, O, love's bow
Shoots buck and doe:
The shaft confounds,
Not that it wounds,
But tickles still thesore.
These lovers cry Oh! oh!they die!
Yet that which seems thewound to kill,
Doth turn oh! oh! to ha!ha! he!
And dying love lives still:
Oh! oh! a while, but ha!ha! ha!
Oh! oh! groans out for ha!ha! ha!
Oh-ho! A while. Then ha! ha!ha!
Oh! oh! groans out for ha!ha! ha! ♪
Heigh-ho.
In love, i' faith, to thevery tip of the nose.
He eats nothing but doves, love,and that breeds hot blood,
and hot blood begetshot thoughts,
and hot thoughts beget hotdeeds, and hot deeds is love.
Is this the generation of love?
hot blood, hot thoughts, and hotdeeds? Why, they are vipers:
is love a generation of vipers?
Sweet lord, who'sa-field to-day?
Hector, Deiphobus,Helenus, Antenor,
and all the gallantry of Troy: Iwould fain have armed to-day,
but my Nell wouldnot have it so.
How chance my brotherTroilus went not?
He hangs the lip at something:
you know all, Lord Pandarus.
Not I, honey-sweet queen.
I long to hear howthey sped to-day.
You'll remember yourbrother's excuse?
To a hair.
Farewell, sweet queen.
Commend me to your niece.
I will, sweet queen.
(♪A retreat sounded)
They're come from field:let us to Priam's hall,
To greet the warriors.Sweet Helen, I must woo you
To help unarm our Hector:his stubborn buckles,
With these your whiteenchanting fingers touch'd,
Shall more obey than tothe edge of steel
Or force of Greekishsinews; you shall do more
Than all the islandkings,--disarm great Hector.
'Twill make us proud to behis servant, Paris;
Yea, what he shall receiveof us in duty
Gives us more palm inbeauty than we have,
Yea, overshines ourself.
Sweet, above thought Ilove thee.
Have you seen my cousin?
No, Pandarus: I stalkabout her door,
Like a strange soul uponthe Stygian banks
Staying for waftage. O, bethou my Charon,
And give me swifttransportance to those fields
Where I may wallow in thelily-beds
Proposed for the deserver!O gentle Pandarus,
From Cupid's shoulderpluck his painted wings
And fly with me toCressid!
I'll bring her straight.
I am giddy; expectationwhirls me round.
The imaginary relish is sosweet
That it enchants my sense:what will it be,
When that the waterypalate tastes indeed
Love's thrice repurednectar? death, I fear me,
Swooning destruction, orsome joy too fine,
Too subtle-potent, tunedtoo sharp in sweetness,
For the capacity of myruder powers:
I fear it much; and I dofear besides,
That I shall losedistinction in my joys;
As doth a battle, whenthey charge on heaps
The enemy flying.
She's making her ready,she'll come straight:
you must be witty now.She does so blush,
and fetches her wind so short,
as if she were frayed witha sprite: I'll fetch her.
It is the prettiest villain:
she fetches her breath asshort as a new-ta'en sparrow.
Even such a passion dothembrace my bosom:
My heart beats thickerthan a feverous pulse;
And all my powers do theirbestowing lose,
Like vassalage at unawaresencountering
The eye of majesty.
Come, come, what need youblush? shame's a baby.
Here she is now: swear theoaths now to her that
you have sworn to me.What, are you gone again?
you must be watched ere yoube made tame, must you?
Come your ways, come yourways; an you draw backward,
we'll put you i' the fills.Why do you not speak to her?
Come, draw this curtain, andlet's see your picture.
Alas the day, how loath youare to offend daylight!
an 'twere dark,you'ld close sooner.
So, so; rub on, andkiss the mistress.
How now! a kiss in fee-farm!build there, carpenter;
the air is sweet.
Nay, you shall fight yourhearts out ere I part you.
The falcon as the tercel, forall the ducks i' the river:
go to, go to.
You have bereft meof all words, lady.
Words pay no debts,give her deeds:
but she'll bereave youo' the deeds too,
if she call your activity inquestion. What, billing again?
Come in, come in: I'll goget a fire.
Will you walk in, my lord?
O Cressida, how often haveI wished me thus!
Wished, my lord! The godsgrant,--O my lord!
What should they grant? whatmakes this pretty abruption?
What too curious dregespies my sweet lady
in the fountain of our love?
More dregs than water, ifmy fears have eyes.
Fears make devils of cherubims;they never see truly.
Blind fear, that seeingreason leads, finds safer
footing than blind reasonstumbling without fear:
to fear the worst oftcures the worse.
O, let my ladyapprehend no fear:
in all Cupid's pageant thereis presented no monster.
Nor nothing monstrousneither?
Nothing, but our undertakings;when we vow to weep seas,
live in fire, eatrocks, tame tigers;
thinking it harder for ourmistress to devise imposition
enough than for us to undergoany difficulty imposed.
This is the monstruosityin love, lady,
that the will is infiniteand the execution confined,
that the desire is boundlessand the act a slave to limit.
They say all lovers swear moreperformance than they are able
and yet reserve an abilitythat they never perform,
vowing more than theperfection of ten
and discharging less thanthe tenth part of one.
They that have the voice oflions and the act of hares,
are they not monsters?
Are there such?such are not we:
praise us as we are tasted,allow us as we prove;
our head shall go baretill merit crown it:
no perfection in reversion shallhave a praise in present:
we will not name desertbefore his birth,
and, being born, hisaddition shall be humble.
Few words to fair faith:
Troilus shall be such to Cressidas what envy can say worst
shall be a mock for histruth, and what truth can
speak truest not truerthan Troilus.
Will you walk in, my lord?
What, blushing still? haveyou not done talking yet?
Well, uncle, what folly Icommit, I dedicate to you.
I thank you for that: ifmy lord get a boy of you,
you'll give him me.Be true to my lord:
if he flinch, chide me for it.
You know now your hostages;
your uncle's wordand my firm faith.
Nay, I'll give my word forher too: our kindred,
though they be longere they are wooed,
they are constant being won:they are burs, I can tell you;
they'll stick where theyare thrown.
Boldness comes to me now,and brings me heart.
Prince Troilus, I haveloved you night and day
For many weary months.
Why was my Cressid then sohard to win?
Hard to seem won: but Iwas won, my lord,
With the first glance thatever--pardon me--
If I confess much, youwill play the tyrant.
No.
I love you now; but not,till now, so much
But I might master it: infaith, I lie;
My thoughts were likeunbridled children, grown
Too headstrong for theirmother. See, we fools!
Why have I blabb'd? whoshall be true to us,
When we are so unsecret toourselves?
But, though I loved youwell, I woo'd you not;
And yet, good faith, Iwish'd myself a man,
Or that we women had men'sprivilege Of speaking first.
Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture Ishall surely speak
The thing I shall repent.See, see, your silence,
Cunning in dumbness, frommy weakness draws
My very soul of counsel!stop my mouth.
And shall, albeit sweetmusic issues thence.
Pretty, i' faith.
My lord, I do beseech you,pardon me;
'Twas not my purpose, thusto beg a kiss:
I am ashamed. O heavens!what have I done?
For this time will I takemy leave, my lord.
Your leave, sweet Cressid!
Leave! an you take leavetill to-morrow morning,--
Pray you, content you.
What offends you, lady?
Sir, mine own company.
You cannot shun Yourself.
Let me go and try:
I have a kind of selfresides with you;
But an unkind self, thatitself will leave,
To be another's fool. Iwould be gone:
Where is my wit? I knownot what I speak.
Well know they what theyspeak that speak so wisely.
Perchance, my lord, I showmore craft than love;
And fell so roundly to alarge confession,
To angle for your thoughts:but you are wise,
Or else you love not, forto be wise and love
Exceeds man's might; thatdwells with gods above.
O that I thought it couldbe in a woman--
As, if it can, I willpresume in you--
To feed for aye her rampand flames of love;
To keep her constancy inplight and youth,
Outliving beauty'soutward, with a mind
That doth renew swifterthan blood decays!
Or that persuasion couldbut thus convince me,
That my integrity andtruth to you
Might be affronted withthe match and weight
Of such a winnow'd purityin love;
How were I then uplifted!but, alas!
I am as true as truth'ssimplicity
And simpler than theinfancy of truth.
In that I'll war with you.
O virtuous fight,
When right with right warswho shall be most right!
True swains in love shallin the world to come
Approve their truths byTroilus: when their rhymes,
Full of protest, of oathand big compare,
Want similes, truth tiredwith iteration,
As true as steel, asplantage to the moon,
As sun to day, as turtleto her mate,
As iron to adamant, asearth to the centre,
Yet, after all comparisonsof truth,
As truth's authenticauthor to be cited,
'As true as Troilus' shallcrown up the verse,
And sanctify the numbers.
Prophet may you be!
If I be false, or swerve ahair from truth,
When time is old and hathforgot itself,
When waterdrops have wornthe stones of Troy,
And blind oblivionswallow'd cities up,
And mighty statescharacterless are grated
To dusty nothing, yet letmemory,
From false to false, amongfalse maids in love,
Upbraid my falsehood! whenthey've said 'as false
As air, as water, wind, orsandy earth,
As fox to lamb, as wolf toheifer's calf,
Pard to the hind, orstepdame to her son,'
'Yea,' let them say, to stickthe heart of falsehood,
'As false as Cressid.'
Go to, a bargain made: seal it,seal it; I'll be the witness.
Here I hold your hand,here my cousin's.
If ever you provefalse one to another,
since I have taken such painsto bring you together,
let all pitiful goers-betweenbe called to the world's end
after my name; callthem all Pandars;
let all constantmen be Troiluses,
all false women Cressids, andall brokers-between Pandars!
say, amen.
Amen.
Amen. Whereupon I will showyou a chamber with a bed;
which bed, because itshall not speak of your
pretty encounters, pressit to death: away!
And Cupid grant alltongue-tied maidens here
Bed, chamber, Pandarto provide this gear!
Now, princes, for theservice I have done,
The advantage of the timeprompts me aloud
To call for recompense.Appear it to your mind
That, through the sight Ibear in things to love,
I have abandon'd Troy,left my possession,
Incurr'd a traitor's name;exposed myself,
From certain and possess'dconveniences,
To doubtful fortunes;sequestering from me all
That time, acquaintance,custom and condition
Made tame and mostfamiliar to my nature,
And here, to do youservice, am become
As new into the world,strange, unacquainted:
I do beseech you, as inway of taste,
To give me now a littlebenefit,
Out of those manyregister'd in promise,
Which, you say, live tocome in my behalf.
What wouldst thou of us,Trojan? make demand.
You have a Trojanprisoner, call'd Antenor,
Yesterday took: Troy holdshim very dear.
Oft have you--often haveyou thanks therefore--
Desired my Cressid inright great exchange,
Whom Troy hath still denied:
but this Antenor, I know, issuch a wrest in their affairs
That their negotiationsall must slack,
Wanting his manage; andthey will almost
Give us a prince of blood,a son of Priam,
In change of him: let himbe sent, great princes,
And he shall buy mydaughter; and her presence
Shall quite strike off allservice I have done,
In most accepted pain.
Let Diomedes bear him,
And bring us Cressidhither: Calchas shall have
What he requests of us.Good Diomed,
Furnish you fairly forthis interchange:
Withal bring word ifHector will to-morrow
Be answer'd in hischallenge: Ajax is ready.
This shall I undertake;and 'tis a burden
Which I am proud to bear.
Achilles stands i' theentrance of his tent:
Please it our general topass strangely by him,
As if he were forgot; and,princes all,
Lay negligent and looseregard upon him:
I will come last. 'Tislike he'll question me
Why such unplausive eyesare bent on him:
If so, I have derisionmedicinable,
To use between yourstrangeness and his pride,
Which his own will shallhave desire to drink:
It may be good: pride hathno other glass
To show itself but pride,for supple knees
Feed arrogance and are theproud man's fees.
We'll execute yourpurpose, and put on
A form of strangeness aswe pass along:
So do each lord, andeither greet him not,
Or else disdainfully,which shall shake him more
Than if not look'd on. Iwill lead the way.
Supple knead.
What, comes the general tospeak with me?
You know my mind, I'llfight no more 'gainst Troy.
What says Achilles? wouldhe aught with us?
Would you, my lord, aughtwith the general?
No.
Nothing, my lord.
The better.
Good day, good day.
How do you? how do you?
What, does the cuckoldscorn me?
How now, Patroclus!
Good morrow, Ajax.
Ha?
Good morrow.
Ay, and good next day too.
What mean these fellows?Know they not Achilles?
They pass by strangely:they were used to bend
To send their smilesbefore them to Achilles;
To come as humbly as theyused to creep
To holy altars.
What, am I poor of late?
'Tis certain, greatness, oncefall'n out with fortune,
Must fall out with mentoo: what the declined is
He shall as soon read inthe eyes of others
As feel in his own fall;for men, like butterflies,
Show not their mealy wingsbut to the summer,
And not a man, for beingsimply man,
Hath any honour, buthonour for those honours
That are without him, asplace, riches, favour,
Prizes of accident as oftas merit:
Which when they fall, asbeing slippery standers,
The love that lean'd onthem as slippery too,
Do one pluck down anotherand together
Die in the fall. But 'tisnot so with me:
Fortune and I are friends:I do enjoy
At ample point all that Idid possess,
Save these men's looks;who do, methinks,
find out Something not worthin me such rich beholding
As they have often given.Here is Ulysses;
I'll interrupt hisreading.
How now Ulysses!
Now, great Thetis' son!
What are you reading?
A strange fellow here
Writes me: 'That man, howdearly ever parted,
How much in having, orwithout or in,
Cannot make boast to havethat which he hath,
Nor feels not what heowes, but by reflection;
As when his virtuesshining upon others
Heat them and they retortthat heat again
To the first giver.'
This is not strange,Ulysses.
The beauty that is bornehere in the face
The bearer knows not, butcommends itself
To others' eyes; nor doththe eye itself,
That most pure spirit ofsense, behold itself,
Not going from itself; buteye to eye opposed
Salutes each other witheach other's form;
For speculation turns notto itself,
Till it hath travell'd andis mirror'd there
Where it may see itself.This is not strange at all.
I do not strain at theposition,--
It is familiar,--but atthe author's drift;
Who, in his circumstance,expressly proves
That no man is the lord ofany thing,
Though in and of him therebe much consisting,
Till he communicate hisparts to others:
Nor doth he of himselfknow them for aught
Till he behold them form'din the applause
Where they're extended;who, like an arch,
reverberates
The voice again, or, likea gate of steel
Fronting the sun, receivesand renders back
His figure and his heat. Iwas much wrapt in this;
And apprehended hereimmediately
The unknown Ajax.
Heavens, what a man isthere! a very horse,
That has he knows not what.Nature, what things there are
Most abject in regard anddear in use!
What things again mostdear in the esteem
And poor in worth! Nowshall we see to-morrow--
An act that very chancedoth throw upon him--
Ajax renown'd. O heavens,what some men do,
While some men leave todo!
How some men creep inskittish fortune's hall,
Whiles others play theidiots in her eyes!
How one man eats intoanother's pride,
While pride is fasting inhis wantonness!
To see these Grecianlords!--why, even already
They clap the lubber Ajaxon the shoulder,
As if his foot were onbrave Hector's breast
And great Troy shrieking.
I do believe it; for theypass'd by me
As misers do by beggars,neither gave to me
Good word nor look: what,are my deeds forgot?
Time hath, my lord, awallet at his back,
Wherein he puts alms foroblivion,
A great-sized monster ofingratitudes:
Those scraps are good deedspast; which are devour'd
As fast as they are made,forgot as soon
As done: perseverance,dear my lord,
Keeps honour bright: tohave done is to hang
Quite out of fashion,like a rusty mail
In monumental mockery.Take the instant way;
For honour travels in astrait so narrow,
Where one but goes abreast:keep then the path;
For emulation hath athousand sons
That one by one pursue: ifyou give way,
Or hedge aside from thedirect forthright,
Like to an enter'd tide,they all rush by
And leave you hindmost;
Or like a gallant horsefall'n in first rank,
Lie there for pavement tothe abject rear,
O'er-run and trampled on:then what they do in present,
Though less than yours inpast, must o'ertop yours;
For time is like afashionable host
That slightly shakes hisparting guest by the hand,
And with his armsoutstretch'd, as he would fly,
Grasps in the comer:welcome ever smiles,
And farewell goes out sighing.O, let not virtue seek
Remuneration for the thingit was;
For beauty, wit,
High birth, vigour ofbone, desert in service,
Love, friendship, charity,are subjects all
To envious andcalumniating time.
One touch of nature makesthe whole world kin,
That all with one consentpraise new-born gawds,
Though they are made andmoulded of things past,
And give to dust that is alittle gilt
More laud than gilto'er-dusted.
The present eye praisesthe present object.
Then marvel not, thougreat and complete man,
That all the Greeks beginto worship Ajax;
Since things in motionsooner catch the eye
Than what not stirs. Thecry went once on thee,
And still it might, andyet it may again,
If thou wouldst not entombthyself alive
And case thy reputation inthy tent;
Whose glorious deeds, butin these fields of late,
Made emulous missions'mongst the gods themselves
And drave great Mars tofaction.
Of this my privacy
I have strong reasons.
But 'gainst your privacy
The reasons are morepotent and heroical:
'Tis known, Achilles, thatyou are in love
With one of Priam'sdaughters.
Ha! known!
Is that a wonder?
The providence that's in awatchful state
Knows almost every grainof Plutus' gold,
Finds bottom in theuncomprehensive deeps,
Keeps place with thoughtand almost, like the gods,
Does thoughts unveil intheir dumb cradles.
There is a mystery--in thesoul of state
with whom relation-- Durst nevermeddle;
Which hath an operationmore divine
Than breath or pen cangive expressure to:
All the commerce that youhave had with Troy
As perfectly is ours asyours, my lord;
And better would it fitAchilles much
To throw down Hector thanPolyxena:
But it must grieve youngPyrrhus now at home,
When fame shall in ourislands sound her trump,
And all the Greekish girlsshall tripping sing,
'Great Hector's sister didAchilles win,
But our great Ajax bravelybeat down him.'
Farewell, my lord: I asyour lover speak;
The fool slides o'er theice that you should break.
To this effect, Achilles,have I moved you:
A woman impudent andmannish grown
Is not more loathed thanan effeminate man
In time of action. I standcondemn'd for this;
They think my littlestomach to the war
And your great love to merestrains you thus:
Sweet, rouse yourself; andthe weak wanton Cupid
Shall from your neckunloose his amorous fold,
And, like a dew-drop fromthe lion's mane,
Be shook to air.
Shall Ajax fight withHector?
Ay, and perhaps receivemuch honour by him.
I see my reputation is atstake
My fame is shrewdly gored.
O, then, beware;
Those wounds heal ill thatmen do give themselves:
Omission to do what isnecessary
Seals a commission to ablank of danger;
And danger, like an ague,subtly taints
Even then when we sit idlyin the sun.
Go call Thersites hither,sweet Patroclus:
I'll send the fool to Ajaxand desire him
To invite the Trojan lordsafter the combat
To see us here unarm'd: Ihave a woman's longing,
An appetite that I am sickwithal,
To see great Hector in hisweeds of peace,
To talk with him and tobehold his visage,
Even to my full of view.
A labour saved!
A wonder!
What?
Ajax goes up and down thefield, asking for himself.
How so?
He must fight singlyto-morrow with Hector,
and is so prophetically proudof an heroical cudgelling
that he raves insaying nothing.
Stalks up anddown like a peacock,
--a stride and a stand:
The man's undone forever; forif Hector break not his neck
i' the combat, he'll break't himself in vain-glory.
He knows not me: Isaid 'Good morrow,
Ajax;' and he replies'Thanks, Agamemnon.'
What think you of this man thattakes me for the general?
He's grown a very land-fish,language-less, a monster.
Thou must be my ambassadorto him, Thersites.
Who, I? why, he'llanswer nobody;
he professes not answering:speaking is for beggars;
he wears his tongue in's arms.I will put on his presence:
let Patroclus makedemands to me,
you shall see thepageant of Ajax.
To him, Patroclus;
tell him I humbly desirethe valiant Ajax
to invite the mostvalorous Hector
to come unarmedto my tent,
and to procure safe-conduct forhis person of the magnanimous
and most illustrioussix-or-seven-times-honoure d
captain-general of theGrecian army, Agamemnon,
et cetera. Do this.
Jove bless great Ajax!
Hum!
I come from the worthyAchilles,--
Ha!
Who most humbly desires you toinvite Hector to his tent,--
Hum!
And to procure safe-conductfrom Agamemnon.
Agamemnon!
Ay, my lord.
Ha!
What say you to't?
God b' wi' you, with allmy heart.
Your answer, sir.
If to-morrow be a fairday, by eleven o'clock
it will go one way or other:howsoever, he shall pay for me
ere he has me.
Your answer, sir.
Fare you well, with all myheart.
Why, but he is not in thistune, is he?
No, but he's out o' tunethus. What music will be in
him when Hector hasknocked out his brains,
I know not;
Come, thou must deliver aletter to him straight.
Let me carry another to hishorse; for that's the more
capable creature.
My mind is troubled, likea fountain stirr'd;
And I myself see not thebottom of it.
Would the fountain of yourmind were clear again,
that I might water an assat it! I had rather be a
tick in a sheep than sucha valiant ignorance.
See, ho! who is thatthere?
It is the Lord AEneas.
Is the prince there inperson?
Had I so good occasion tolie long
As you, prince Paris, nothingbut heavenly business
Should rob my bed-mate ofmy company.
That's my mind too. Goodmorrow, Lord AEneas.
A valiant Greek,AEneas,--take his hand,--
Witness the process ofyour speech, wherein
You told how Diomed, awhole week by days,
Did haunt you in thefield.
Health to you, valiantsir,
During all question of thegentle truce;
But when I meet you arm'd,as black defiance
As heart can think orcourage execute.
The one and other Diomedembraces.
Our bloods are now in calm;and, so long, health!
But when contention andoccasion meet,
By Jove, I'll play thehunter for thy life
With all my force, pursuitand policy.
And thou shalt hunt alion, that will fly
With his face backward. Inhumane gentleness,
Welcome to Troy! now, byAnchises' life,
Welcome, indeed! By Venus'hand I swear,
No man alive can love insuch a sort
The thing he means to killmore excellently.
We sympathize: Jove, letAEneas live,
If to my sword his fate benot the glory,
A thousand completecourses of the sun!
But, in mine emuloushonour, let him die,
With every joint a wound,and that to-morrow!
We know each other well.
We do; and long to knoweach other worse.
This is the most despitefulgentle greeting,
The noblest hateful love,that e'er I heard of.
What business, lord, soearly?
I was sent for to theking; but why, I know not.
His purpose meets you:'twas to bring this Greek
To Calchas' house, andthere to render him,
For the enfreed Antenor,the fair Cressid:
Let's have your company,or, if you please,
Haste there before us: Iconstantly believe--
Or rather, call my thoughta certain knowledge--
My brother Troilus lodgesthere to-night:
Rouse him and give himnote of our approach.
With the whole qualitywherefore: I fear
We shall be muchunwelcome.
That I assure you:
Troilus had rather Troywere borne to Greece
Than Cressid borne fromTroy.
There is no help;
The bitter disposition ofthe time
Will have it so. On, lord;we'll follow you.
Good morrow, friend.
And tell me, noble Diomed,faith, tell me true,
Even in the soul of soundgood-fellowship,
Who, in your thoughts,merits fair Helen best,
Myself or Menelaus?
Both alike:
He merits well to haveher, that doth seek her,
Not making any scruple ofher soilure,
With such a hell of painand world of charge,
And you as well to keepher, that defend her,
Not palating the taste ofher dishonour,
With such a costly loss ofwealth and friends:
He, like a puling cuckold,would drink up
The lees and dregs of aflat tamed piece;
You, like a lecher, out ofwhorish loins
Are pleased to breed outyour inheritors:
Both merits poised, eachweighs nor less nor more;
But he as he, the heavierfor a whore.
You are too bitter to yourcountrywoman.
She's bitter to hercountry: hear me, Paris:
For every false drop inher bawdy veins
A Grecian's life hathsunk; for every scruple
Of her contaminatedcarrion weight,
A Trojan hath been slain:since she could speak,
She hath not given so manygood words breath
As for her Greeks andTrojans suffer'd death.
Fair Diomed, you do aschapmen do,
Dispraise the thing thatyou desire to buy:
But we in silence holdthis virtue well,
We'll but commend what weintend to sell.
Here lies our way.
Dear, trouble not yourself:the morn is cold.
Then, sweet my lord, I'llcall mine uncle down;
He shall unbolt the gates.
Trouble him not;
To bed, to bed: sleep killthose pretty eyes,
And give as softattachment to thy senses
As infants' empty of allthought!
Good morrow, then.
I prithee now, to bed.
Are you a-weary of me?
O Cressida! but that thebusy day,
Waked by the lark, hathroused the ribald crows,
And dreaming night willhide our joys no longer,
I would not from thee.
Night hath been too brief.
Beshrew the witch! withvenomous wights she stays
As tediously as hell, butflies the grasps of love
With wings moremomentary-swift than thought.
You will catch cold, andcurse me.
Prithee, tarry:
You men will never tarry.
O foolish Cressid! I mighthave still held off,
And then you would havetarried. Hark!
there's one up.
What, 's all the doorsopen here?
It is your uncle.
A pestilence on him! nowwill he be mocking:
I shall have such a life!
How now, how now!how go maidenheads?
Here, you maid! where'smy cousin Cressid?
Go hang yourself, younaughty mocking uncle!
You bring me to do, andthen you flout me too.
To do what? to do what?let her say
what: what have I broughtyou to do?
Come, come, beshrew yourheart! you'll ne'er be good,
Nor suffer others.
Ha! ha! Alas, poor wretch!ah, poor capocchia!
hast not slept to-night?would he not, a naughty man,
let it sleep? abugbear take him!
Did not I tell you? Would hewere knock'd i' the head!
(Knocking)
Hark. Who's that at door? gooduncle, go and see.
My lord, come you againinto my chamber:
You smile and mock me, asif I meant naughtily.
Ha, ha!
Come, you are deceived, Ithink of no such thing.
(Knocking within)
How earnestly they knock!Pray you, come in:
I would not for half Troyhave you seen here.
My LordAEneas! By my troth,
I knew you not: what newswith you so early?
Is not Prince Troilushere?
Here! what should he dohere?
Come, he is here, my lord;do not deny him:
It doth import him much tospeak with me.
Is he here, say you?'tis more than I know,
I'll be sworn: for my ownpart, I came in late.
What should he do here?
Who!--nay, then: come,come, you'll do him wrong
ere you're ware: you'llbe so true to him,
to be false to him: donot you know of him,
but yet go fetchhim hither; go.
How now! what's thematter?
My lord, I scarce haveleisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash:there is at hand
Paris your brother, andDeiphobus,
The Grecian Diomed, andour Antenor
Deliver'd to us; and forhim forthwith,
Ere the first sacrifice,within this hour,
We must give up toDiomedes' hand
The Lady Cressida.
Is it so concluded?
By Priam and the generalstate of Troy:
They are at hand and readyto effect it.
How my achievements mockme!
I will go meet them: and,my Lord AEneas,
We met by chance; you didnot find me here.
Good, good, my lord; thesecrets of nature
Have not more gift intaciturnity.
Is't possible? nosooner got but lost?
The devil take Antenor! theyoung prince will go mad:
a plague upon Antenor! I wouldthey had broke 's neck!
How now! what's thematter? who was here?
Ah, ah!
Why sigh you so profoundly?where's my lord? gone!
Tell me, sweet uncle,what's the matter?
Would I were as deep underthe earth as I am above!
O the gods! what's thematter?
Prithee, get thee in: wouldthou hadst ne'er been born!
I knew thou wouldstbe his death.
O, poor gentleman! Aplague upon Antenor!
Good uncle, I beseech you,
what's the matter?
Thou must be gone, wench,thou must be gone;
thou art changed for Antenor:thou must to thy father,
and be gone from Troilus:'twill be his death;
'twill be his bane; hecannot bear it.
O you immortal gods! Iwill not go.
Thou must.
I will not, uncle: I haveforgot my father;
I know no touch ofconsanguinity;
No kin no love, no blood,no soul so near me
As the sweet Troilus. Oyou gods divine!
Make Cressid's name thevery crown of falsehood,
If ever she leave Troilus!Time, force, and death,
Do to this body whatextremes you can;
But the strong base andbuilding of my love
Is as the very centre ofthe earth,
Drawing all things to it.
(Cressida starts crying)
I'll go in and weep,--
Do, do.
Tear my bright hair andscratch my praised cheeks,
Crack my clear voice withsobs and break my heart
With sounding Troilus. Iwill not go from Troy.
Be moderate, be moderate.
Why tell you me ofmoderation?
The grief is fine, full,perfect, that I taste,
And violenteth in a senseas strong
As that which causeth it:how can I moderate it?
If I could temporize withmy affection,
Or brew it to a weak andcolder palate,
The like allayment could Igive my grief.
My love admits noqualifying dross;
No more my grief, in sucha precious loss.
Here, here, here he comes.
Ah, sweet ducks!
O Troilus! Troilus!
What a pair of spectaclesis here!
Let me embrace too.How now, lambs?
Cressid, I love thee in sostrain'd a purity,
That the bless'd gods, asangry with my fancy,
More bright in zeal thanthe devotion which
Cold lips blow to theirdeities, take thee from me.
Have the gods envy?
Ay, ay, ay, ay; 'tis tooplain a case.
And is it true that I mustgo from Troy?
A hateful truth.
What, and from Troilustoo?
From Troy and Troilus.
Is it possible?
And suddenly; where injuryof chance
Puts back leave-taking,justles roughly by
All time of pause, rudelybeguiles our lips
Of all rejoindure,forcibly prevents
Our lock'd embrasures,strangles our dear vows
Even in the birth of ourown labouring breath:
We two, that with so manythousand sighs
Did buy each other, mustpoorly sell ourselves
With the rude brevity anddischarge of one.
Injurious time now with arobber's haste
Crams his rich thieveryup, he knows not how:
As many farewells as bestars in heaven,
With distinct breath andconsign'd kisses to them,
He fumbles up into a loseadieu,
And scants us with asingle famish'd kiss,
Distasted with the salt ofbroken tears.
[Within] My lord, is thelady ready?
Hark! you are call'd: somesay the Genius so
Cries 'come' to him thatinstantly must die.
Bid them have patience;she shall come anon.
Where are my tears?rain, to lay this wind,
or my heart will beblown up by the root.
I must then to theGrecians?
No remedy.
A woful Cressid 'mongstthe merry Greeks!
When shall we see again?
Hear me, my love: be thoutrue and I will see thee--
I true! how now! whatwicked deem is this?
Nay, we must useexpostulation kindly,
For it is parting from us:
I speak not 'be thoutrue,' as fearing thee,
For I will throw my gloveto Death himself,
That there's no maculationin thy heart:
But 'be thou true,' say I,to fashion in
My sequent protestation;be thou true,
And I will see thee.
O, you shall be exposed,my lord, to dangers
As infinite as imminent!but I'll be true.
And I'll grow friend withdanger. Wear this sleeve.
And you this glove. Whenshall I see you?
I will corrupt the Greciansentinels,
To give thee nightlyvisitation.
But yet be true.
O heavens! 'be true'again!
Hear while I speak it,love:
The Grecian youths arefull of quality;
They're loving, well composedwith gifts of nature,
Flowing and swelling o'erwith arts and exercise:
How novelty may move, andparts with person,
Alas, a kind of godlyjealousy--
Which, I beseech you, calla virtuous sin--
Makes me afeard.
O heavens! you love menot.
Die I a villain, then!
In this I do not call yourfaith in question
So mainly as my merit: Icannot sing,
Nor heel the high lavolt,nor sweeten talk,
Nor play at subtle games;fair virtues all,
To which the Grecians aremost prompt and pregnant:
But I can tell that ineach grace of these
There lurks a still anddumb-discoursive devil
That tempts most cunningly:but be not tempted.
Do you think I will?
No.
But something may be donethat we will not:
And sometimes we aredevils to ourselves,
When we will tempt thefrailty of our powers,
Presuming on theirchangeful potency.
Nay, good my lord,--
Come, kiss; and let uspart.
(from outside) Brother Troilus!
Good brother, come youhither;
And bring AEneas and theGrecian with you.
My lord, will you be true?
Who, I? alas, it is myvice, my fault:
Whiles others fish withcraft for great opinion,
I with great truth catchmere simplicity;
Whilst some with cunninggild their copper crowns,
With truth and plainness Ido wear mine bare.
Fear not my truth: themoral of my wit
Is 'plain and true;' there'sall the reach of it.
Welcome, Sir Diomed! hereis the lady
Which for Antenor wedeliver you:
At the port, lord, I'llgive her to thy hand,
And by the way possessthee what she is.
Entreat her fair; and, bymy soul, fair Greek,
If e'er thou stand atmercy of my sword,
Name Cressida and thy lifeshall be as safe
As Priam is in Ilion.
Fair Lady Cressid,
So please you, save thethanks this prince expects:
The lustre in your eye,heaven in your cheek,
Pleads your fair usage;and to Diomed
You shall be mistress, andcommand him wholly.
Grecian, thou dost not useme courteously,
To shame the zeal of mypetition to thee
In praising her: I tellthee, lord of Greece,
She is as far high-soaringo'er thy praises
As thou unworthy to becall'd her servant.
I charge thee use herwell, even for my charge;
For, by the dreadfulPluto, if thou dost not,
Though the great bulkAchilles be thy guard,
I'll cut thy throat.
O, be not moved, PrinceTroilus:
Let me be privileged by myplace and message,
To be a speaker free; whenI am hence
I'll answer to my lust:and know you, lord,
I'll nothing do on charge:to her own worth
She shall be prized; butthat you say 'be't so,'
I'll speak it in my spiritand honour, 'no.'
Come, to the port. I'lltell thee, Diomed,
This brave shall oft makethee to hide thy head.
Lady, give me your hand,and, as we walk,
To our own selves bend weour needful talk.
(Cressida stops crying)
(♪trumpet plays)
Hark! Hector's trumpet.
How have we spent thismorning!
The prince must think metardy and remiss,
That sore to ride beforehim to the field.
'Tis Troilus' fault: come,come, to field with him.
Yea, with a bridegroom'sfresh alacrity,
Let us address to tend onHector's heels:
The glory of our Troy doththis day lie
On his fair worth andsingle chivalry.
(screams)
Here art thou inappointment fresh and fair,
Anticipating time withstarting courage.
Give with thy trumpet aloud note to Troy,
Thou dreadful Ajax; thatthe appalled air
May pierce the head of thegreat combatant
And hale him hither.
Thou, trumpet, there's mypurse.
Now crack thy lungs, andsplit thy brazen pipe:
Blow, villain, till thysphered bias cheek
Outswell the colic ofpuff'd Aquilon:
Come, stretch thy chest andlet thy eyes spout blood;
Thou blow'st for Hector.
(♪Trumpet sounds)
No trumpet answers.
'Tis but early days.
Is not yond Diomed, withCalchas' daughter?
'Tis he, I ken the mannerof his gait;
He rises on the toe: thatspirit of his
In aspiration lifts himfrom the earth.
Is this the Lady Cressid?
Even she.
Most dearly welcome to theGreeks, sweet lady.
Our general doth saluteyou with a kiss.
Yet is the kindness butparticular;
'Twere better she werekiss'd in general.
And very courtly counsel:I'll begin.
So much for Nestor.
I'll take what winter fromyour lips, fair lady:
Achilles bids you welcome.
I had good argument forkissing once.
But that's no argument forkissing now;
For this popp'd Paris inhis hardiment,
And parted thus you andyour argument.
O deadly gall, and themeof all our scorns!
For which we lose ourheads to gild his horns.
The first was Menelaus'kiss; this, mine:
Patroclus kisses you.
O, this is trim!
Paris and I kiss evermorefor him.
I'll have my kiss, sir.Lady, by your leave.
In kissing, do you renderor receive?
Both take and give.
I'll make my match tolive,
The kiss you take isbetter than you give;
Therefore no kiss.
I'll give you boot, I'llgive you three for one.
You're an odd man; giveeven or give none.
An odd man, lady! everyman is odd.
No, Paris is not; for youknow 'tis true,
That you are odd, and heis even with you.
You fillip me o' the head.
No, I'll be sworn.
It were no match, yournail against his horn.
May I, sweet lady, beg akiss of you?
You may.
I do desire it.
Why, beg, then.
Why then for Venus' sake,give me a kiss,
When Helen is a maidagain, and his.
I am your debtor, claim itwhen 'tis due.
Never's my day, and then akiss of you.
Lady, a word: I'll bringyou to your father.
A woman of quick sense.
Fie, fie upon her!
There's language in hereye, her cheek, her lip, her eye
Nay, her foot speaks;her wanton spirits look out
At every joint and motiveof her body.
O, these encounterers, soglib of tongue,
That give accostingwelcome ere it comes,
And wide unclasp thetables of their thoughts
To every ticklish reader!set them down
For sluttish spoils ofopportunity
And daughters of the game.
(♪ Trojans' trumpet sounds)
Yonder comes the troop.
Hail, all you state ofGreece! what shall be done
To him that victorycommands? or do you purpose
A victor shall be known?will you the knights
Shall to the edge of allextremity
Pursue each other, orshall be divided
By any voice or order ofthe field?
Hector bade ask.
Which way would Hectorhave it?
He cares not; he'll obeyconditions.
'Tis done like Hector; butsecurely done,
A little proudly, andgreat deal misprizing
The knight opposed.
If not Achilles, sir,
What is your name?
If not Achilles, nothing.
Therefore Achilles: but,whate'er, know this:
In the extremity of greatand little,
Valour and pride excelthemselves in Hector;
The one almost as infiniteas all,
The other blank asnothing. Weigh him well,
And that which looks likepride is courtesy.
This Ajax is half made ofHector's blood:
In love whereof, halfHector stays at home;
Half heart, half hand,half Hector comes to seek
This blended knight, halfTrojan and half Greek.
A maiden battle, then? O,I perceive you.
Here is Sir Diomed. Go,gentle knight,
Stand by our Ajax: as youand Lord AEneas
Consent upon the order oftheir fight,
So be it; either to theuttermost,
Or else a breath: thecombatants being kin
Half stints their strifebefore their strokes begin.
They are opposed already.
What Trojan is that samethat looks so heavy?
The youngest son ofPriam, a true knight,
they call him Troilus.
Not yet mature, yetmatchless, firm of word,
Speaking in deeds anddeedless in his tongue;
Not soon provoked nor beingprovoked soon calm'd:
His heart and hand bothopen and both free;
For what he has he gives,what thinks he shows;
Yet gives he not tilljudgment guide his bounty,
Manly as Hector, but moredangerous;
For Hector in his blaze ofwrath subscribes
To tender objects, but hein heat of action
Is more vindicative thanjealous love:
They call him Troilus, andon him erect
A second hope, as fairlybuilt as Hector.
Thus says AEneas; one thatknows the youth
Even to his inches, andwith private soul
They are in action.
Did in great Ilion thustranslate him to me.
You must no more.
Princes, enough, so pleaseyou.
I am not warm yet; let usfight again.
As Hector pleases.
Why, then will I no more:
Thou art, great lord, myfather's sister's son,
A cousin-german to greatPriam's seed;
The obligation of ourblood forbids
A gory emulation 'twixt ustwain:
Were thy commixtion Greekand Trojan so
That thou couldst say'This hand is Grecian all,
And this is Trojan; thesinews of this leg
All Greek, and this allTroy; my mother's blood
Runs on the dexter cheek,and this sinister
Bounds in my father's;' byJove multipotent,
Thou shouldst not bearfrom me a Greekish member
Wherein my sword had notimpressure made
Of our rank feud: but thejust gods gainsay
That any drop thouborrow'dst from thy mother,
My sacred aunt, should bymy mortal sword
Be drain'd! Let me embracethee, Ajax:
By him that thunders, thouhast lusty arms;
Hector would have themfall upon him thus:
Cousin, all honour tothee!
I thank thee, Hector
Thou art too gentle andtoo free a man:
I came to kill thee,cousin, and bear hence
A great addition earned inthy death.
Not Neoptolemus somirable,
On whose bright crest Famewith her loud'st Oyes
Cries 'This is he,' couldpromise to himself
A thought of added honourtorn from Hector.
There is expectance herefrom both the sides,
What further you will do.
We'll answer it;
The issue is embracement:Ajax, farewell.
If I might in entreatiesfind success--
As seld I have thechance--I would desire
My famous cousin to ourGrecian tents.
'Tis Agamemnon's wish, andgreat Achilles
Doth long to see unarm'dthe valiant Hector.
AEneas, call my brotherTroilus to me,
And signify this lovinginterview
To the expecters of ourTrojan part;
Desire them home. Give methy hand, my cousin;
I will go eat with theeand see your knights.
Great Agamemnon comes tomeet us here.
The worthiest of them tellme name by name;
But for Achilles, mine ownsearching eyes
Shall find him by hislarge and portly size.
Worthy of arms! as welcomeas to one
That would be rid of suchan enemy;
But that's no welcome:understand more clear,
What's past and what's tocome is strew'd with husks
And formless ruin ofoblivion;
But in this extant moment,faith and troth,
Strain'd purely from allhollow bias-drawing,
Bids thee, with mostdivine integrity,
From heart of very heart,great Hector, welcome.
I thank thee, mostimperious Agamemnon.
My well-famed lord ofTroy, no less to you.
Let me confirm my princelybrother's greeting:
You brace of warlikebrothers, welcome hither.
Who must we answer?
The noble Menelaus.
O, you, my lord? by Marshis gauntlet, thanks!
Mock not, that I affectthe untraded oath;
Your quondam wife swearsstill by Venus' glove:
She's well, but bade menot commend her to you.
Name her not now, sir;she's a deadly theme.
O, pardon; I offend.
I have, thou gallantTrojan, seen thee oft
Labouring for destiny makecruel way
Through ranks of Greekishyouth, and I have seen thee,
As hot as Perseus, spurthy Phrygian steed,
Despising many forfeitsand subduements,
When thou hast hung thyadvanced sword i' the air,
Not letting it decline onthe declined,
That I have said to somemy standers by
'Lo, Jupiter is yonder,dealing life!'
And I have seen thee pauseand take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greekshave hemm'd thee in,
Like an Olympian wrestling:this have I seen;
But this thy countenance,still lock'd in steel,
I never saw till now. Iknew thy grandsire,
And once fought with him:he was a soldier good;
But, by great Mars, thecaptain of us all,
Never saw like thee. Letan old man embrace thee;
And, worthy warrior,welcome to our tents.
'Tis the old Nestor.
Let me embrace thee, goodold chronicle,
That hast so long walk'dhand in hand with time:
Most reverend Nestor, I amglad to clasp thee.
I would my arms couldmatch thee in contention,
As they contend with theein courtesy.
I would they could.
Ha!
By this white beard, I'ldfight with thee to-morrow.
Well, welcome, welcome! Ihave seen the time.
I wonder now how yondercity stands
When we have here her baseand pillar by us.
I know your favour, LordUlysses, well.
Ah, sir, there's many aGreek and Trojan dead,
Since first I saw yourselfand Diomed
In Ilion, on your Greekishembassy.
Sir, I foretold you thenwhat would ensue:
My prophecy is but halfhis journey yet;
For yonder walls, thatpertly front your town,
Yond towers, whose wantontops do buss the clouds,
Must kiss their own feet.
I must not believe you:
There they stand yet, andmodestly I think,
The fall of every Phrygianstone will cost
A drop of Grecian blood:the end crowns all,
And that oldcommon arbitrator,
Time, Will one day end it.
So to him we leave it.
Most gentle and mostvaliant Hector, welcome:
After the general, Ibeseech you next
To feast with me and seeme at my tent.
I shall forestall thee,Lord Ulysses, thou!
Now, Hector, I have fedmine eyes on thee;
I have with exact viewperused thee, Hector,
And quoted joint by joint.
Is this Achilles?
I am Achilles.
Stand fair, I pray thee:let me look on thee.
Behold thy fill.
Nay, I have done already.
Thou art too brief: I willthe second time,
As I would buy thee, viewthee limb by limb.
O, like a book of sportthou'lt read me o'er;
But there's more in methan thou understand'st.
Why dost thou so oppressme with thine eye?
Tell me, you heavens, inwhich part of his body
Shall I destroy him? whetherthere, or there, or there?
That I may give the localwound a name
And make distinct the verybreach whereout
Hector's great spiritflew: answer me, heavens!
It would discredit theblest gods, proud man,
To answer such a question:stand again:
Think'st thou to catch mylife so pleasantly
As to prenominate in niceconjecture
Where thou wilt hit medead?
I tell thee, yea.
Wert thou an oracle totell me so,
I'd not believe thee.Henceforth guard thee well;
For I'll not kill theethere, nor there, nor there;
But, by the forge thatstithied Mars his helm,
I'll kill thee everywhere, yea, o'er and o'er.
You wisest Grecians,pardon me this brag;
His insolence draws follyfrom my lips;
But I'll endeavour deedsto match these words,
Or may I never--
Do not chafe thee, cousin:
And you, Achilles, letthese threats alone,
Till accident or purposebring you to't:
You may have every dayenough of Hector
If you have stomach; thegeneral state, I fear,
Can scarce entreat you tobe odd with him.
I pray you, let us see youin the field:
We have had pelting wars,since you refused
The Grecians' cause.
Dost thou entreat me,Hector?
To-morrow do I meet thee,fell as death;
To-night all friends.
Thy hand upon that match.
First, all you peers ofGreece, go to my tent;
There in the full convivewe: afterwards,
As Hector's leisure andyour bounties shall
Concur together, severallyentreat him.
Beat loud the tabourines,let the trumpets blow,
That this great soldiermay his welcome know.
My Lord Ulysses, tell me,I beseech you,
In what place of the fielddoth Calchas keep?
At Menelaus' tent, mostprincely Troilus:
There Diomed doth feastwith him to-night;
Who neither looks upon theheaven nor earth,
But gives all gaze andbent of amorous view
On the fair Cressid.
Shall sweet lord, be boundto you so much,
After we part fromAgamemnon's tent,
To bring me thither?
You shall command me, sir.
As gentle tell me,of what honour was
This Cressida in Troy?Had she no lover there
That wails her absence?
O, sir, to such asboasting show their scars
A mock is due. Will youwalk on, my lord?
She was beloved, sheloved; she is, and doth:
But still sweet love isfood for fortune's tooth.
I'll heat his blood withGreekish wine to-night,
Which with my scimitarI'll cool to-morrow.
Patroclus, let us feasthim to the height.
Here comes Thersites.
How now, thou core ofenvy!
Thou crusty batch ofnature, what's the news?
Why, thou picture ofwhat thou seemest,
and idol of idiot worshippers,here's a letter for thee.
From whence, fragment?
Why, thou full dish offool, from Troy.
Well said, adversity!
Prithee, be silent, boy; Iprofit not by thy talk:
thou art thought to beAchilles' male varlet.
Male varlet, you rogue!what's that?
Why, his masculine whore.Now, the rotten diseases
of the south, the guts-griping,ruptures, catarrhs,
loads o' gravel i' the back,cold palsies, raw eyes,
dirt-rotten livers,wheezing lungs, sciaticas,
incurable bone-ache,
take and take again suchpreposterous discoveries!
Why thou damnablebox of envy, thou,
what meanest thouto curse thus?
Do I curse thee?
Why no, you ruinous butt,you whoreson
indistinguishable cur, no.
No! why art thou thenexasperate, thou idle
immaterial skein of sleave-silk,
thou tassel of a prodigal'spurse, thou?
Ah, how the poorworld is pestered
with such waterflies,diminutives of nature!
Out, gall!
Finch-egg!
My sweet Patroclus, I amthwarted quite
From my great purpose into-morrow's battle.
Here is a letter fromQueen Hecuba,
A token from her daughter,my fair love,
Both taxing me and gagingme to keep
An oath that I have sworn.I will not break it:
Fall Greeks; fail fame;honour or go or stay;
My major vow lies here,this I'll obey.
Come, come, Thersites,help to trim my tent:
This night in banquetingmust all be spent.
Away, Patroclus!
With too much bloodand too little brain,
these two may run mad; but,if with too much brain
and too little blood they do,I'll be a curer of madmen.
Here's Agamemnon,
an honest fellow enough andone that loves quails;
but he has not so muchbrain as earwax:
O, his brother, thebull,--the primitive statue,
and oblique memorialof cuckolds;
To be a dog, a mule, a cat, afitchew, a toad, a lizard,
an owl, or aherring without a roe,
I would not care;but to be Menelaus,
I would conspireagainst destiny.
Hey-day! spiritsand fires!
Oh yes. Oh yes.
We go wrong, we go wrong.
No, yonder 'tis;
There, where we see thelights.
I trouble you.
No, not a whit.
Here comes himself toguide you.
Welcome, brave Hector;welcome, princes all.
So now, fair prince ofTroy, I bid good night.
Ajax commands the guard totend on you.
Thanks and good night tothe Greeks' general.
Good night, my lord.
Good night, sweet lordMenelaus.
Good night and welcome,both at once,
to those That go or tarry.
Old Nestor tarries; andyou too, Diomed,
Keep Hector company anhour or two.
I cannot, lord; I haveimportant business,
The tide whereof is now.Good night, great Hector.
Give me your hand.
Sir. Goodnight.
Come. Into my tent.
Follow his torch; hegoes to Calchas' tent:
I'll keep you company.
Sweet sir, you honour me.
That same Diomed's afalse-hearted rogue,
a most unjust knave;
I will no more trusthim when he leers
than I will a serpentwhen he hisses:
they say he keeps a Trojandrab,
and uses the traitorCalchas' tent:
I'll after. Nothing but lechery!all incontinent varlets!
What, are you up here, ho?speak.
Who calls?
Diomed. Where'syour daughter?
She comes to you.
How now, my charge!
Now, my sweet guardian!Hark, a word with you.
Yea, so familiar!
She will sing any man atfirst sight.
Will you remember?
Remember! yes.
Nay, but do, then;
And let your mind becoupled with your words.
What should she remember?
List.
Sweet honey Greek, temptme no more to folly.
Roguery!
Nay, then,--
I'll tell you what,--
Foh, foh! come, tell apin: you are forsworn.
In faith, I cannot: whatwould you have me do?
A juggling trick,--to besecretly open.
What did you swear youwould bestow on me?
I prithee, do not hold meto mine oath;
Bid me do any thing butthat, sweet Greek.
Good night.
Diomed,--
No, no, good night: I'llbe your fool no more.
Thy better must.
Hark, one word in yourear.
O plague and madness!
You are moved, prince; letus depart, I pray you,
Lest your displeasureshould enlarge itself
To wrathful terms: thisplace is dangerous;
I beseech you, go.
Behold, I pray you!
Nay, good my lord, go off:
You flow to greatdistraction; come, my lord.
I pray thee, stay.
You have not patience;come.
I pray you, stay; by helland all hell's torments
I will not speak a word!
And so, good night.
Nay, but you part inanger.
Doth that grieve thee?
O wither'd truth!
Why, how now, Trojan!
By Jove, I willbe patient.
Guardian!--why, Greek!
Foh, foh! adieu; youpalter.
In faith, I do not: comehither once again.
She strokes his cheek!
Come, come.
Nay, stay; by Jove, I willnot speak a word:
There is between my willand all offences
A guard of patience: staya little while.
How the devil Luxury, with hisfat rump and potato-finger,
tickles these together!Fry, lechery, fry!
But will you, then?
In faith, I will, la;never trust me else.
Give me some token for thesurety of it.
I'll fetch you one.
You have sworn patience.
Fear me not, sweet lord;
I will not be myself, norhave cognition
Of what I feel: I am allpatience.
Here, Diomed, keep thissleeve.
O beauty! where is thyfaith?
My lord,--
I will be patient;outwardly I will.
You look upon that sleeve;behold it well.
He loved me--O falsewench!--Give't me again.
Whose was't?
It is no matter, now Ihave't again.
I will not meet with youto-morrow night:
I prithee, Diomed, visitme no more.
Now she sharpens: wellsaid, whetstone!
I shall have it.
What, this?
Ay, that.
O, all you gods! O pretty,pretty pledge!
Thy master now liesthinking in his bed
Of thee and me, and sighs,and takes my glove,
And gives memorial daintykisses to it,
As I kiss thee. Nay, donot snatch it from me;
He that takes that dothtake my heart withal.
I had your heart before,this follows it.
I did swear patience.
You shall not have it,Diomed; faith, you shall not;
I'll give you somethingelse.
I will have this: whosewas it?
It is no matter.
Come, tell me whose itwas.
'Twas one's that loved mebetter than you will.
But, now you have it,take it.
Whose was it?
By all Diana'swaiting-women yond,
And by herself, I will nottell you whose.
To-morrow will I wear iton my helm,
And grieve his spirit thatdares not challenge it.
Wert thou the devil, andworest it on thy horn,
It should be challenged.
Well, well, 'tis done, 'tispast: and yet it is not;
I will not keep my word.
Why, then, farewell;
Thou never shalt mockDiomed again.
You shall not go: onecannot speak a word,
But it straight startsyou.
I do not like thisfooling.
What, shall I come? thehour?
Ay, come:--O Jove!--docome:--I shall be plagued.
Farewell till then.
Good night: I prithee,come.
But with my heart theother eye doth see.
Ah, poor our sex! thisfault in us I find,
The error of our eyedirects our mind:
What error leads must err;
O, then conclude Minds sway'dby eyes are full of turpitude.
All's done, my lord.
It is.
Why stay we, then?
To make a recordation tomy soul
Of every syllable thathere was spoke.
But if I tell how thesetwo did co-act,
Shall I not lie inpublishing a truth?
Sith yet there is acredence in my heart,
An esperance soobstinately strong,
That doth invert theattest of eyes and ears,
As if those organs haddeceptious functions,
Created only tocalumniate.
Was Cressid here?
I cannot conjure, Trojan.
She was not, sure.
Most sure she was.
Why, my negation hath notaste of madness.
Nor mine, my lord: Cressidwas here but now.
Let it not be believed forwomanhood!
Think, we had mothers; donot give advantage
To stubborn critics, apt,without a theme,
For depravation, to squarethe general sex
By Cressid's rule: ratherthink this not Cressid.
What hath she done, prince,that can soil our mothers?
Nothing at all, unlessthat this were she.
This she? no, this isDiomed's Cressida:
If beauty have a soul,this is not she;
If souls guide vows, ifvows be sanctimonies,
If sanctimony be the gods'delight,
If there be rule in unityitself,
This is not she. O madnessof discourse,
That cause sets up withand against itself!
Bi-fold authority! wherereason can revolt
Without perdition, andloss assume all reason
Without revolt: this is,and is not, Cressid.
Within my soul there dothconduce a fight
Of this strange naturethat a thing inseparate
Divides more wider thanthe sky and earth,
And yet the spaciousbreadth of this division
Admits no orifex for apoint as subtle
As Ariachne's broken woofto enter.
Instance, O instance!strong as Pluto's gates;
Cressid is mine, tied withthe bonds of heaven:
Instance, O instance!strong as heaven itself;
The bonds of heaven areslipp'd, dissolved, and loosed;
And with another knot,five-finger-tied,
The fractions of herfaith, orts of her love,
The fragments, scraps, thebits and greasy relics
Of her o'er-eaten faith,are bound to Diomed.
May worthy Troilus be halfattach'd
With that which here hispassion doth express?
Ay, Greek; and that shallbe divulged well
In characters as red asMars his heart
Inflamed with Venus: neverdid young man fancy
With so eternal and sofix'd a soul.
Hark, Greek: as much as Ido Cressid love,
So much by weight hate Iher Diomed:
That sleeve is mine thathe'll bear on his helm;
Were it a casque composedby Vulcan's skill,
My sword should bite it:not the dreadful spout
Which shipmen do thehurricano call,
Constringed in mass by thealmighty sun,
Shall dizzy with moreclamour Neptune's ear
In his descent than shallmy prompted sword
Falling on Diomed.
O Cressid! O false Cressid!false, false, false!
Let all untruths stand bythy stained name,
And they'll seem glorious.
O, contain yourself
Your passion draws earshither.
I have been seeking youthis hour, my lord:
Hector, by this, is arminghim in Troy;
Ajax, your guard, stays toconduct you home.
Have with you, prince. Mycourteous lord, adieu.
Farewell, revolted fair!and, Diomed,
Stand fast, and wear acastle on thy head!
I'll bring you to thegates.
Accept distracted thanks.
When was my lord so muchungently temper'd,
To stop his ears againstadmonishment?
Unarm, unarm, and do notfight to-day.
You train me to offendyou; get you in:
By all the everlastinggods, I'll go!
My dreams will, sure,prove ominous to the day.
No more, I say.
Where is my brotherHector?
Here, sister; arm'd, andbloody in intent.
Consort with me in loudand dear petition,
Pursue we him on knees;for I have dream'd
Of bloody turbulence, andthis whole night
Hath nothing been but shapesand forms of slaughter.
O, 'tis true.
Ho! bid my trumpet sound!
No notes of sally, for theheavens, sweet brother.
Be gone, I say: the godshave heard me swear.
The gods are deaf to hotand peevish vows:
They are pollutedofferings, more abhorr'd
Than spotted livers in thesacrifice.
O, be persuaded! do notcount it holy
To hurt by being just: itis as lawful,
For we would give much, touse violent thefts,
And rob in the behalf ofcharity.
It is the purpose thatmakes strong the vow;
But vows to every purposemust not hold:
Unarm, sweet Hector.
Hold you still, I say;
Mine honour keeps theweather of my fate:
Life every man holds dear;but the dear man
Holds honour far moreprecious-dear than life.
How now, young man! mean'stthou to fight to-day?
Cassandra, call my fatherto persuade.
No, faith, young Troilus;doff thy harness, youth;
I am to-day i' the vein ofchivalry:
Let grow thy sinews tilltheir knots be strong,
And tempt not yet thebrushes of the war.
Unarm thee, go, and doubtthou not, brave boy,
I'll stand to-day for theeand me and Troy.
Brother, you have a viceof mercy in you,
Which better fits a lionthan a man.
What vice is that, goodTroilus? chide me for it.
When many times thecaptive Grecian falls,
Even in the fan and windof your fair sword,
You bid them rise, andlive.
O,'tis fair play.
Fool's play, by heaven,Hector.
How now! how now!
For the love of all thegods,
Let's leave the hermitpity with our mothers,
And when we have ourarmours buckled on,
The venom'd vengeance rideupon our swords,
Spur them to ruthful work,rein them from ruth.
Fie, savage, fie!
Hector, then 'tis wars.
Troilus, I would not haveyou fight to-day.
Who should withhold me?
Not fate, obedience, northe hand of Mars
Beckoning with fierytruncheon my retire;
Not Priamus and Hecuba onknees,
Their eyes o'ergalled withrecourse of tears;
Not you, my brother, withyour true sword drawn,
Opposed to hinder me,should stop my way,
But by my ruin.
Lay hold upon him, Priam,hold him fast:
He is thy crutch; now ifthou lose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, andall Troy on thee,
Fall all together.
Come, Hector, come, goback:
Thy wife hath dream'd; thymother hath had visions;
Cassandra doth foresee;and I myself
Am like a prophet suddenlyenrapt
To tell thee that this dayis ominous:
Therefore, come back.
AEneas is a-field;
And I do stand engaged tomany Greeks,
Even in the faith ofvalour, to appear
This morning to them.
Ay, but thou shalt not go.
I must not break my faith.
You know me dutiful;therefore, dear sir,
Let me not shame respect;but give me leave
To take that course byyour consent and voice,
Which you do here forbidme, royal Priam.
O Priam, yield not to him!
Do not, dear father.
Andromache, I am offendedwith you:
Upon the love you bear me,get you in.
This foolish, dreaming,superstitious girl
Makes all these bodements.
O, farewell, dear Hector!
Look, how thou diest! look,how thy eye turns pale!
Look, how thy wounds dobleed at many vents!
Hark, how Troy roars! howHecuba cries out!
How poor Andromacheshrills her dolours forth!
Behold, distraction,frenzy and amazement,
Like witless antics, oneanother meet,
And all cry, Hector!Hector's dead! O Hector!
Away! away!
Farewell: yet, soft!Hector! take my leave:
Thou dost thyself and allour Troy deceive.
You are amazed, my liege,at her exclaim:
Go in and cheer the town:we'll forth and fight,
Do deeds worth praise andtell you them at night.
Farewell: the gods withsafety stand about thee!
(♪horns sound)
They are at it, hark!Proud Diomed, believe,
I come to lose my arm, orwin my sleeve.
Do you hear, my lord? doyou hear?
What now?
Here's a letter come fromyond poor girl.
Let me read.
A whoreson tisick,
a whoreson rascallytisick so troubles me,
and the foolishfortune of this girl;
and what one thing,what another,
that I shall leave youone o' these days:
and I have a rheumin mine eyes too,
and such an achein my bones that,
unless a man were cursed, Icannot tell what to think on't.
What says she there?
Words, words, mere words,no matter from the heart:
The effect doth operateanother way.
Go, wind, to wind, thereturn and change together.
My love with words anderrors still she feeds;
But edifies another withher deeds.
Now they are clapper-clawingone another;
That dissembling abominablevarlets Diomed,
has got that same scurvy doting
foolish young knave's sleeveof Troy there in his helm:
I would fain see them meet;
that that sameyoung Trojan ass,
that loves the whore there,
might send that Greekishwhore-masterly villain,
with the sleeve, back to thedissembling luxurious drab,
of a sleeveless errand.
O' the t'other side,
the policy of thosecrafty swearing rascals,
that stale oldmouse-eaten dry cheese,
Nestor, and that samedog-fox, Ulysses,
is not proved worthya blackberry:
they set me up, in policy,that mongrel cur, Ajax,
against that dog of asbad a kind, Achilles:
and now is the cur Ajax prouderthan the cur Achilles,
and will not arm to-day;
whereupon the Grecians beginto proclaim barbarism,
and policy grows intoan ill opinion.
Soft! here comes sleeve,and t'other.
Fly not; for shouldst thoutake the river Styx,
I would swim after.
Thou dost miscall retire:
I do not fly, butadvantageous care
Withdrew me from the oddsof multitude:
Have at thee!
Hold thy whore, Grecian!--nowfor thy whore, Trojan!
What art thou, Greek? artthou for Hector's match?
Art thou of blood andhonour?
No, no, I am a rascal; ascurvy railing knave:
a very filthy rogue.
I do believe thee: live.
God-a-mercy, that thouwilt believe me;
but a plague break thyneck for frightening me!
What's become of thewenching rogues?
I think they haveswallowed one another:
I'll seek them.
Renew, renew! The fiercePolydamas
Hath beat down Menon:bastard Margarelon
Hath Doreus prisoner,
And stands colossus-wise,waving his beam,
Upon the pashed corses ofthe kings
Epistrophus and Cedius:Polyxenes is slain,
Amphimachus and Thoasdeadly hurt,
Patroclus ta'en or slain,and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruised: thedreadful Sagittary
Appals our numbers: hastewe, Diomed,
To reinforcement, or weperish all.
Go, bear Patroclus' bodyto Achilles;
And bid the snail-pacedAjax arm for shame.
There is a thousandHectors in the field:
Now here he fights onGalathe his horse,
And there lacks work; anonhe's there afoot,
And there they fly or die,like scaled sculls
Before the belching whale;then is he yonder,
And there the strawyGreeks, ripe for his edge,
Fall down before him, likethe mower's swath:
Here, there, and everywhere, he leaves and takes,
Dexterity so obeyingappetite
That what he will he does,and does so much
That proof is call'dimpossibility.
O, courage, courage,princes! great Achilles
Is arming, weeping,cursing, vowing vengeance:
Patroclus' wounds haveroused his drowsy blood,
Together with his mangledMyrmidons,
That noseless, handless, hack'dand chipp'd, come to him,
Crying on Hector. Ajaxhath lost a friend
And foams at mouth, and heis arm'd and at it,
Roaring for Troilus, whohath done to-day
Mad and fantasticexecution,
Engaging and redeeming ofhimself
With such a careless forceand forceless care
As if that luck, in veryspite of cunning,
Bade him win all.
Troilus, thou cowardTroilus, show thy head!
Troilus, I say! where'sTroilus?
What wouldst thou?
I would correct him.
Were I the general, thoushouldst have my office
Ere that correction. Troilus,I say!
O traitor Diomed! turn thyfalse face, thou traitor,
Ha, art thou there?
I'll fight with him alone:stand, Diomed.
He is my prize; I will notlook upon.
Come, both you coggingGreeks; have at you both!
Yea, Troilus? O, wellfought, my youngest brother!
Stand, stand, thou Greek;thou art a goodly mark:
No? wilt thou not? I likethy armour well;
I'll frush it and unlockthe rivets all,
But I'll be master of it:
Come here about me, you myMyrmidons;
Mark what I say. Attend mewhere I wheel:
Strike not a stroke, butkeep yourselves in breath:
And when I have the bloodyHector found,
Empale him with yourweapons round about;
In fellest manner executeyour aims.
Follow me, sirs, and myproceedings eye:
It is decreed Hector thegreat must die.
The cuckold and thecuckold-maker are at it.
Now, bull! now, dog!'Loo, Paris, 'loo!
'loo, Paris, 'loo!
The bull has the game:ware horns, ho!
Turn, slave, and fight.
What art thou?
A bastard son of Priam's.
I am a bastard too; I lovebastards: I am a bastard begot,
bastard instructed,bastard in mind,
bastard in valour, inevery thing illegitimate.
One bear will not bite another,
and wherefore shouldone bastard?
Take heed,
if the son of a whorefight for a whore,
he tempts judgment:farewell, bastard.
The devil take thee,coward!
Most putrefied core, sofair without,
Thy goodly armour thushath cost thy life.
Now is my day's work done;I'll take good breath:
Rest, sword; thou hast thyfill of blood and death.
Look, Hector, how the sunbegins to set;
How ugly night comesbreathing at his heels:
Even with the vail anddarking of the sun,
To close the day up,Hector's life is done.
I am unarm'd; forego thisvantage, Greek.
Strike, fellows, strike;this is the man I seek.
So, Ilion, fall thou next!now, Troy, sink down!
Here lies thy heart, thysinews, and thy bone.
On, Myrmidons, and cry youall amain,
'Achilles hath the mightyHector slain.'
(A retreat sounded)
Hark! a retire upon ourGrecian part.
The dragon wing of nighto'erspreads the earth,
And, stickler-like, thearmies separates.
My half-supp'd sword, thatfrankly would have fed,
Pleased with this daintybait, thus goes to bed.
Come, tie his body to myhorse's tail;
Along the field I will theTrojan trail.
Stand, ho! yet are wemasters of the field:
Never go home; here starvewe out the night.
Hector is slain.
Hector! the gods forbid!
He's dead; and at themurderer's horse's tail,
In beastly sort, dragg'dthrough the shameful field.
Frown on, you heavens,effect your rage with speed!
Sit, gods, upon yourthrones, and smile at Troy!
I say, at once let yourbrief plagues be mercy,
And linger not our suredestructions on!
My lord, you do discomfortall the host!
You understand me not thattell me so:
I do not speak of flight,of fear, of death,
But dare all imminencethat gods and men
Address their dangers in.Hector is gone:
Who shall tell Priam so,or Hecuba?
Let him that will ascreech-owl aye be call'd,
Go in to Troy, and saythere, Hector's dead:
There is a word will Priamturn to stone;
Make wells and Niobes ofthe maids and wives,
Cold statues of the youth,and, in a word,
Scare Troy out of itself.But, march away:
Hector is dead; there isno more to say.
Stay yet. You vileabominable tents,
Thus proudly pight uponour Phrygian plains,
Let Titan rise as early ashe dare,
I'll through and through you!and, thou great-sized coward,
No space of earth shallsunder our two hates:
I'll haunt thee like awicked conscience still,
That mouldeth goblins swiftas frenzy's thoughts.
Strike a free march toTroy! with comfort go:
Hope of revenge shall hideour inward woe.
But hear you, hear you!
Hence, broker-lackey!ignomy and shame
Pursue thy life, and liveaye with thy name!
A goodly medicine for myaching bones! O world!
world! world! thus is thepoor agent despised!
O traitors and bawds, howearnestly are you set
a-work, and how ill requited!
why should ourendeavour be so loved
and the performance soloathed? what instance for it?
what verse forit? Let me see:
Full merrily thehumble-bee doth sing,
Till he hath lost hishoney and his sting;
And being once subdued inarmed tail,
Sweet honey and sweetnotes together fail.
Good traders in the flesh, setthis in your painted cloths.
As many as be here ofpander's hall,
Your eyes, half out, weepout at Pandar's fall;
Or if you cannot weep, yetgive some groans,
Though not for me, yet foryour aching bones.
Brethren and sisters ofthe hold-door trade,
Some two months hence mywill shall here be made:
Till then I'll sweat andseek about for eases,
And at that time bequeatheyou my diseases.